The Particle based Moving Interface Method
for soft matter mechanics and fluid/membrane
interactions with applications to biological cells
List of Figures
1.1

Reference and deformed configuration of the interface. The parametrization r maps the
2D space ξ α to the 3D space xi . The (2*2) deformation tensor F̄ip maps the deformation
of a material point ξ α in the 2D reference configuration to the 2D deformed configuration
Ξα . The (3*3) deformation tensor F̄ maps the deformation of a material point r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 )
in the 3D reference configuration to the 3D deformed configuration r(Ξ1 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ), Ξ2 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 )) 15

1.2

(a) shows the elements split by membrane Γ and the enriched nodes (circle). The 3D
distance function can be seen in (b) where its intersection with the plan z = 0 defines
Γ, and (c) shows the Heaviside function in an element cut by Γ. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.3

19

(a) shows how the mesh nodes 1 through 4 are used to discretize the Lagrange multipliers and interface velocity (circled nodes) and (b) shows the value taken by the shape
functions N̄1 and N̄2 in each element e1 to e5 cut by the interface. Each tick along the
absisse One can note that the interpolation of the Lagrange multipliers is constant in
e2 while e4 and e5 share the same Lagrange multipliers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.4

20

Figure (a) shows the sampling of Γ by the particles y represented by a circle while
the associated nodes p inside the computational tube λtube are represented by crosses.
Figure (b) shows the second order Runge-Kutta time integration of the evolution of the
˜ denotes the velocity of the interface interpolated at the particle’s position
interface: v̄
while Ω is the angular velocity of the interface’s normal n̄. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.5

23

Local polynomial approximation of the surface (and of any Lagrangian field). The polynomial ξ 3 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) that approximates the interface is constructed via least square fitting
2t
t
using neighbouring particles in the local referential {a1t
0 , a0 , n̄0 } centered on particle y0 . 24

1.6

Update and transport of the deformation gradient F̄: (a) the fluid and interface velocity
field are first computed by solving (1.26). The interface velocity field v̄ is then used to
update F̄ in the basis {at0 1 , at0 2 , n̄t0 } (b). Finally, the interface position is updated (c)
and the deformation gradient is rotated in the basis {at+dt
, at+dt
, n̄t+dt } to yield F̄t+dt
1
2
(d). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.7

26

General flowchart: the different velocity and pressure fields are solved using the X-FEM
while the tracking and update of the interface geometry and Lagrangian fields is achieved
using the grid based particle method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.8

(a) inflation of an elastic circle with a point source at its center and (b) numerical
solution at equilibrium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.9

28
30

(a) jump of pressure field and (b) jump of tangential viscous stress as a function of
angle θ along the interface using both the unmodified X-FEM as well as with the EDOF
blocking strategy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv

31

1.10 (a) circle spinning in an infinite expanse of fluid under the action of a tangential force
and (b) numerical result for the pressure and velocity field. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.11 Lagrange multiplier field λp (a) and

λ+

32

(b) along the interface as a function of angle

θ, using both the ‘naive’ and the M-discretization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32

1.12 (a) Finite element mesh and boundary conditions, (b) pressure field and velocity stream
line for the fluid flowing around the sphere and (c) convergence of the error made on
the pressure on the surface of the sphere as the mesh size decreases.

. . . . . . . . . .

33

1.13 Simulation and analytical results of the velocity (a) and pressure (b) for different slip
lengths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

1.14 Convergence of the error made in conserving the enclosed volume (a) and residual velocity (b) as the mesh size decreases, for ∆t ∼ O(h/R)4 and for different slip lengths .

35

1.15 figure (a) shows the capsule deformations for different values of G while figure (c) shows
the effect of the slip length on the capsule deformation and velocity profile. Figure (c)
shows the fluid streamlines around the capsule and the surface jacobian J. The time
step used was ∆t = (h/R) × 1e−4 and the tolerances T OLv = T OLp = T OLv̄k = 1e−5

36

1.16 Figure (a) shows the computational domain and the boundary conditions for the elastic
capsule in shear flow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37

1.17 Figures (a) and (b) show the pressure fields, streamlines and velocity magnitude for the
steady states of a capsule in shear flow, with respectively stick and slip surfaces. The
time step used was ∆t = (h/R)×1e−4 and the tolerances T OLv = T OLp = T OLv̄k = 1e−5 37
1.18 Figure shows the capsule deformation with different bending rigidities in the cases (a)
l+ = 0 (stick) and (b) l+ >> R (slip). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

38

1.19 Figures (a) and (b) show the Taylor deformation parameter Dxy as a function of the
non-dimensional time kshear t for different bending rigidities in the stick and slip cases
respectively. The black dots in (a) represent data point from [152]. . . . . . . . . . . .

38

1.20 Figure (a) shows the pipette aspiration geometry and figure (b) shows the analytical and
numerical results for the penetration length Lp as a function of capillarity G. The time
step used was ∆t = (h/R) × 1e−2 and the tolerances T OLv = T OLp = T OLv̄k = 1e−5

39

1.21 The surface Jacobian J of the vesicle is shown as a color gradient along the interface,
along with the surrounding fluid pressure field and streamlines. The time step used was
∆t = (h/R) × 1e−4 and the tolerances T OLv = T OLp = T OLv̄k = 1e−5 . . . . . . . .
2.1

(a) fluid domain Ω and fixed structure Γ with no-slip/no-penetration boundary condidtion. (b) local polar coordinate system centred at the corner. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.2

47

Asymptotic solution: pressure and stream lines for a viscous flow near a sharp corner
α = 0.8π for (a) mode I and (b) mode II. The pressure field is singular at r = 0. . . .

2.3

40

48

Asymptotic solution: pressure and stream lines forming eddies for a viscous flow near a
sharp corner α = 0.3π for (a) mode I and (b) mode II. The pressure and velocity fields
vanish at r = 0 and show no singularity.

2.4

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

Node selection for the slip and tip enrichment of a (a) corner and (b) plate. The black
dots denote tip enrichment for the velocity and pressure (only the four corner nodes in
the case of the pressure) while the squares indicate split enrichment for the pressure. .

51

2.5

Discretization of the Lagrange multipliers in (a) simple cut element, (b) double cut
element, (c) corner tip element and (d) tip element.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.6

52

Flow around a corner of angle α.The velocity given by the analytical solution is imposed
at the boundary of the computational domain while a no-slip/no-penetration condition
is enforced along the wall of the corner (shown in red). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.7

56

Error Ev made in computing the flow velocity around the corner tip in mode I and II,
for different corner angle α. The error can be divided by up to a factor of 8 by using
corner tip enrichment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.8

Streamlines with and without enrichment for (a) α = π, (b) α = 0.87π,(c) α = 0.75π
and (c) α = 0.47π.

2.9

57

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

57

Streamlines and pressure fields for α = π, α = 0.87π, α = 0.75π and α = 0.47π. Left
column (a)-(d), without enrichment and right column (e)-(h) with enrichment. . . . .

58

2.10 Two-dimensional channel with sudden symmetrical expansion. The expansion is characterized by the ratio h/H) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

2.11 Corner discretization for the two-dimensional channel with sudden symmetrical expansion. (a) 2 level refinement, (b) 3 level refinement, (c) 4 level refinement. (d) shows
the 1 level refinement discretization of the corner when using the enrichment functions.

59

2.12 Pressure field and velocity streamlines for the two-dimensional channel with sudden
symmetrical expansion. The expansion is characterized by the ratio h/H = 0.5. . . . .

60

2.13 Velocity streamlines for the two-dimensional channel with sudden symmetrical expansion, using the X-FEM without tip enrichment with 4 different level of mesh refinement.
The streamlines are shown to converge towards those from using the present numerical
technique. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60

2.14 Flow though a fibrous network. No-penetration boundary conditions are enforced at
x = L and x = −L while an influx of q = 1ms−1 is prescribed at y = H/2.) . . . . . .

61

2.15 Pressure field and streamline patterns for a viscous flow through a network with fiber
density (a) d = 0.1, (b) d = 0.5, (c) d = 0.9 and (d) d = 1.7. Figures (e) and (f )
are a close up on the pressure singularities around fiber tips. Figure (g) shows the
equivalent permeability keq as a function of fiber density with enrichment (continuous
line with circles) and without enrichment (dashed line). The relative difference ∆keq =
(keq − keq w/o )/keq is shown in (h). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

2.16 Equivalent permeability as a function of fiber orientation, with Sθ = 1. Pressure field
and streamline patterns are shown for (a) θ = 0, (b) θ = π/4 and (c) θ = π/2 . . . . .
3.1

63

fluid domain Ω, interface ΓI and fixed structure ΓF with no-slip/no-penetration boundary condition. The local polar coordinate system is centred at the fiber tip and oriented
in the direction of the fiber. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.2

69

Black dots denote tip enrichment for the velocity and pressure (only the four corner
nodes in the case of the pressure) while squares and triangles indicate split enrichment
for the pressure for the fibers and the interface respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71

3.3

(a) particles and associated nodes in the computational tube. (b) Local polynomial approximation of the surface (and of any Lagrangian field). The polynomial ξ 3 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 )
that approximates the interface is constructed via least square fitting using neighbouring
particles in the local referential {a0 , n̄0 } centered on particle y0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.4

73

Error Ev made in computing the flow velocity around the corner tip in mode I and II,
for different corner angle α. The error can be lessened by more then a factor of 10
using corner tip enrichment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.5

75

Periodic assumption of a fibrous network with a population of permeating particles. A
unit periodic cell is identified and analysized to extract the macroscopic properties of
the network. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.6

Schematic of the geometry, dimensions and boundary conditions for assessing the permeation of a soft colloid particle through a fibrous network. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3.7

78

Vesicle speed as a function of non-dimensionalized time t∗ for network 1, Ca = 0.04 (a)
and Ca = 0.2 (b). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
a function of the capillary number Ca = µU
γ
function of the capillary number Ca = µU
γ .

3.8

Vesicle permeability as

3.9

Fluid permeability as a

4.1

Global scheme of the cell membrane with the detailed parts of the cortex and the lipid

80

. . . . . . . . . . .

81

. . . . . . . . . . .

81

bilayer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2

76

86

Fig (a) shows the tension-dilation curve for the unfolding membrane [136]. In Fig (b)
we see the behaviour of the function fb for different values of parameters Kb , fb 0 and nb . 88

4.3

Equilibrium force for different fixed distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4.4

The evolution of the cell membrane around a nanoparticle of 45 nm in Radius. Figures

91

A, B and C represent the pressure and velocity field of the fluid in different moments
of the endocytosis. The last one is the evolution of the wrapped area with the time.
The values of the different parameters are Kbond =2 · 10−3 N/m, l0 =10nm, Nr = 5 ·
10−3 1/nm2 , Nl =5 · 10− 31/nm2 , KL =109 nm2 , kB T =4.1e − 21J, τ =5nm and γ= 1 pN

93

4.5

Percentage of particle area wrapped by the membrane as a function of the particle size.

94

4.6

(a) evolution of the blebbing process. The white arrows deonte the adhesion force between
the cortex and the membrane. (b) bleb volume as a function of cortical tension . . . .

95

4.7

Bleb evolution for different values of actin polymerization rates. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

95

5.1

Schematic diagram of the domain and its evolution under an applied traction. The
moving interface Γ(t) at any time t separates the solid domain Ωs (t) from its complement
Ω \ Ωs (t). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.2

99

Illustration of the mixed extended finite element and the location of the degrees of freedom. Circles (◦) show the location of bilinear element nodes and crosses (×) show the location
of biquadratic element nodes. The interface cutting through the element is represented implicitly
using the level set function φ.

5.3

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104

Grid particle scheme . Figure (a) shows the one to one correspondence between the
particles and the nodes inside the computational tube, while (b) shows the local basis,
centred on the particle y0 closest to the node considered p. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106

5.4

Schematic diagram of the uniaxial extension of a soft rectangular bar. A traction of
t̄ = −2 MPa is applied to the end of the bar to deform it elastically. . . . . . . . . . . 111

5.5

Numerical results from the CEL formulation for the downward flow of material under
applied uniaxial tension. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112

5.6

Performance of the mixed element formulation for uniaxial tension test. Variation of
F22 along the length of domain is shown for bilinear, biquadratic and mixed formulation
for two compressible materials with Poisson’s ratio ν=0 (left column) and ν=0.25 (right
column). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113

5.7

Validation and error analysis of numerical results from the CEL formulation for uniaxial
tension test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114

5.8

Numerical results from the CEL formulation for the shear flow of material under applied
shear traction. The results are in agreement with theory, thus, validating our scheme. . 115

5.9

Schematic diagram of the indentation of soft solid. A Gaussian type pressure load is
applied to simulate the contact between a rigid indenter and the solid. At the bottom
the solid is allowed to slip, however, due to symmetry the center node is pinned. . . . . 116

5.10 Numerical results showing the Jacobian determinant of the deformation and the shape
evolution of a soft rounded rectangular solid for p0 = 6 MPa during indentation. . . . 116
5.11 Validation of numerical results from the CEL formulation with the standard Lagrangian
formulation in the commercial software Abaqus for the indentation of a rounded rectangular solid. The L2 error is calculated by taking the Abaqus solution from a very fine
mesh as the exact solution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
5.12 Numerical results showing the Jacobian determinant of the deformation and the shape
evolution of a soft rounded rectangular solid for p0 = 40 MPa during indentation.
Abaqus UHYPER subroutine did not converge for this high load case, which demonstrates the robustness of the current CEL formulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
5.13 Numerical results from the CEL formulation for lateral compression of a circular cylinder. The cylinder is located between two rigid planes on the top and bottom that moved
towards each other so that four fold symmetry is maintained. The planes are gradually
moved to the final position shown in (d) until iteration i = 80 and then held in position.
At iteration i = 112, the velocity in the domain vanishes (less than tolerance) so that
the stress in the solid is at static equilibrium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
6.1

Mechano-chemical potential µsf,mech
in direction α as a function of strain for differα
ent stretch frequencies (a). SFs assemble in direction α when µsf,mech
decreases, and
α
disassemble when µsf,mech
increases. Mechanical equilibrium at angle α(b) . . . . . . . 123
α

6.2

Effect of an isotropic substrate stiffness increase on cell contractility as predicted by (a)
the model and (b) experimental methods [69]. (c) schematic representation of experimental set up in [69], with Np ' 100.

6.3

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

The effect of constant stretch on the volume fraction of SF φsf
0 in direction α = 0 is
shown in figure (a), and (b) shows the orientation and disassembly of myofibrils (when
overstretched) [147] with the arrows representing the direction of stretch. Figure (c) is
the angular distribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126

6.4

Effect of cyclic stretching for ν = 0 (b)(experimental result (a) from [90]) and ν = 0.5
(c) (experimental result (d) from [154]). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126

Introduction
The problem of embedded soft bodies and membranes undergoing large shape changes is relevant
to many areas of engineering and biological research but still remains a significant computational
challenge. Particular examples of this problem include the mechanics of the cell membrane and
vesicles and the extreme deformations they are subjected to during migration [130, 169, 61, 62, 23, 131],
blebbing [31, 158, 59, 32], division [16] and budding [112, 177]. The ability of biological tissues to adapt
and respond to external mechanical stimuli is also at the heart of a variety of biological phenomena,
such as morphogenesis [75], wound healing [110] or cancer dynamics [124, 108, 26]. This behavior arises
from the capacity of certain cells (i.e. fibroblasts) to generate a network of contractile Stress Fibers
(SFs) which attach to the surrounding extra-cellular matrix (ECM) via Focal Adhesions (FAs). This
dynamic structure enables cells to sense their mechanical environment and react to any changes in
stretch, stress or stiffness by applying contractile forces, which ultimately results in ECM deformation
and remodeling [165, 169]. The aim of this thesis is to develop the theoretical and numerical tools
to describe: (a) the mechanics of an immersed membrane and (b) the mechanics of immersed soft
matter, as these two aspects are fundamental in describing such biological problems.
From a computational point of view, one of the most acknowledged method to couple fluid motion and
structure deformation is the Immersed Boundary (IB) method [126, 128, 127]. The method particularly
relies on three features: the fluid flow equations are handled with an Eulerian approach, the membrane
deformation are described within a Lagrangian frame and the fluid-structure interactions are handled
via a forcing term that is localized on the membrane domain. It is able to simulate the deformation of
thin boundaries as well as three-dimensional structures immersed in an incompressible flow [179, 189,
176]. An approach similar to the IB method is the Distributed Lagrange Multipler/Fictitious Domain
(DLM/FD) method [72, 71], which has also been adapted to simulate deformable thin surfaces [161, 7].
Here, the coupling between the fluid and the structure is enforced in the entire domain occupied by
the structure. The structure is therefore tied to the underlying fictitious flow and has to deform in an
incompressible way, which limits the type of materials that can be simulated.
Another approach developed to study fluid/interface interaction within the creeping flow regime is
the Boundary Integral (BI) method, where only the surface of the interface needs to be discretized.
The method is very successful at simulating drops in viscous flows [12, 192], and was also extended to
elastic interfaces by using the projection of the velocity gradient of the surrounding fluid to find the
deformation rate of the interface [133, 183].
Most of these methods have in common a Lagrangian mesh for the structure interacting with the fluid
and cannot easily handle the large deformations or viscoelastic behaviors observed in many biological
systems. Indeed, when the membrane is described in a Lagrangian framework, extreme deformations
often lead to severe distortions of the finite element mesh, an issue that can only be approached by
complicated and computationally expensive mesh regularization techniques [107].
A solution to this problem was presented by Cottet et al in[38] via the introduction of a fully Eulerian
description of the system, in which kinematic quantities representing the interface motion (such as
position or dilation) are implicitly described by a level-set function which is defined and updated
on a fixed underlying Eulerian grid. The approach has the advantage of removing the need for
discretizing the two-dimensional surface and effectively eliminates the issue of mesh distortion. Using
11

this formulation, the authors successfully predicted the equilibrium shape of a red blood cell and
showed that large membrane deformation could be naturally handled. Similar level-set approaches
are typically used to simulate fluid interfaces and bio-film growth [144, 54] and generalized to elastoplastic materials [159, 120], as well as hyperelastic materials [87, 39, 83, 104]. Two major limitations
of existing level-set formulations however are as follows. First, a level-set function is typically unable
to carry and transport lagrangian information associated with the interface, such as, for instance,
the interface strain or a concentration of interface particles. The technique is therefore restricted to
fluid interfaces or limited cases of elastic behaviors [38]. Second, the level-set formulation implicitely
assumes that the fluid flow is continuous across the interface (‘stick’ condition between fluid and
interface). This precludes the consideration of ‘slip’ conditions, that are known to be preponderant in
many situations such as flows at the micro or nano scale [111], on hydrophobic surfaces, or even on
hydrophilic surfaces under certain conditions [4].
The objective of the first chapter is to introduce a general theoretical and computational framework
that can accurately describe the large deformation of an immersed thin membrane in a variety of
situations. We specifically propose the following three contributions: (a) the model endows the interface with its own independent velocity and curvilinear coordinate system, which is required for
the calculation of the surface velocity gradient that dictates the interface deformation, and for the
implementation of the Navier boundary condition. (b) The method uses a modified version of the
X-FEM that naturally handles discontinuities in pressure and tangential velocity arising from the
Navier boundary condition and the interface elastic stress. Introducing the tangential enrichment in
the velocity field only imposes the discontinuity in the tangential direction and the continuity condition in the normal direction is automatically satisfied, which eliminates the need for an additional
Lagrange multiplier field. Finally (c) the Extended Finite element method is used in combination with
a grid-based particle method [102] to provide an explicit, high definition description of the geometry
of the interface and to transport the Lagrangian quantities on the interface. This method of tracking
the interface geometry is not subject to mesh distortion and can therefore handle arbitrarily large
deformations without needing time consuming mesh reinitialization algorithms. Computationally, the
description of the membrane with a grid-based particle method is particularly useful to calculate a
variety of high order derivative on a curved surface.
The objective of the second chapter is to adapt the method developed in chapter 1 to more complex
boundary conditions by introducing an X-FEM based numerical-asymptotic expansion for simulating
a Stokes flow near a sharp corner. Indeed, a large number of flows considered in fluid-structure
interaction problems include flows around sharp corners or tips, such as the filtration of soft immersed
vesicles through porous membranes [181, 86, 82]. Recognizing the similarities between the pressure field
of the flow around a corner and the stress field around a crack tip, we here follow the same approach
as taken by Moës et al in [117] and present a collocation method in the framework of the X-FEM
to simulate the Stokes flow around structures with sharp corners. We enrich the finite element space
around corner tips with the first order symmetric and anti-symmetric modes of the asymptotic solution
for a Stokes flow near a sharp corner, following Moffatt’s solution [118]. The proposed approach has the
following three contributions: (a) the local field singularities near sharp corners are resolved without
the need for computationally expensive mesh refinement, (b) the enrichment functions are calculated
for any convex sharp corners and (c) the technique presented holds for any simultaneous combinations
12

of sharp corners, and can handle the simulation of a Stokes flow with complex boundary condition
without any refinement and on a fixed structured mesh.
The third and fourth chapters apply the methods introduced in the first two chapters to biologically
relevant problems. Chapter 3 studies the permeation of soft particles through filtration membranes
and estimates the equivalent permeabilities of different fibrous networks with respect to the vesicles
as well as the solvent in which they are immersed. Chapter 4 adapts the immersed thin membrane
formulation to the study of the membrane of biological cells and shows that it can successfully describe
complex behaviors such as endocytosis or cell blebbing.
While the first four chapters mainly focus on the mechanics of the cell’s and vesicle’s membrane, the
objective of the two last chapters is to concentrate on the mechanics that take place inside biological
cells. The fifth chapter presents a numerical formulation for the mechanics of embedded soft matter
in an Eulerian framework. This last formulation reuses many of the numerical tools developed in
the first chapter, and constitutes a numerical framework perfectly adapted to the study of the large
deformations as well as the anisotropic/viscoelastic constitutive models of live cells. Finally, the sixth
chapter aims at formulating such a constitutive model by introducing a simple thermodynamical model
that describes the formation and orientation of stress fibers in contractile cells. It is shown that the
model is able to capture key mechanisms of SF organization in contractile cells on substrate of variable
stiffness and subjected to arbitrary stretching conditions.

13

Chapter 1

Particle-based Moving Interface
Method for the study of immersed thin
membranes
The outline of the chapter is as follows: Section 1 introduces the kinematics and deformation measures
used for the fluid and the interface in an Eulerian framework, as well as the governing and constitutive
equations. The numerical implementation of the derived equation is then discussed in the context of the
X-FEM and the grid based particle method in section 2. The validity and accuracy of the formulation
is then assessed in section 3 where we consider, in order, the stability of the Lagrange multiplier fields
along the interface, the numerical convergence for a axisymmetrical flow past a spherical capsule with
various surface properties and membrane rigidities, the shear flow past a two-dimensional capsule
and the effect of slip length. We then study the case of the aspiration of a liquid droplet through a
cylindrical channel and the permeation of an elastic capsule through a tight opening. Section 4 finally
concludes with a discussion of the results and possible future applications.

1.1
1.1.1

Mathematical formulation for a soft immersed interface
Geometry and deformation measures of a membrane in Eulerian framework

Consider a curvilinear surface Γ in a three-dimensional Euclidean space whose geometry is defined
by the position of a point x through the parameterization xi (t) = ri (ξ α , t), ξ α , α = 1, 2 being fixed
surface coordinates and xi , i = 1, 2, 3 being the components of the position vector. In the remainder
of the manuscript, greek indices will be considered as running on values 1, 2, while latin indices will
span values 1, 2, 3, both being summed over their respective range if repeated. With the help of the
parameterization ri (ξ α , t), one can define the components of two vectors, tangent to the surface Γ, as
aiα = ∂ri /∂ξα . The two vectors a1 and a2 form the basis of the plane tangent to Γ at point x. A
third vector n̄, orthogonal to the surface and of unit length is defined as n̄ = a1 × a2 /|a1 × a2 |, and
represents the orientation of Γ at point x. The induced first fundamental form of the surface Γ, also
called metric, is given by the scalar product aαβ = aα · aβ , and can be used to define a dual basis to aα
as aα = aαβ aβ , whereby aαβ = (aαβ )−1 and aα · aβ = δαβ . The second fundamental form is a surface
tensor field whose components in the basis of the tangent plane are bαβ := −aα · n̄,β . An appropriate
14

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

measure of surface bending, which we will refer to as the curvature tensor C̄, can then
be obtained by calculating the change in the second fundamental form between the reference and
the current configurations as follows:
ip α
C̄ = (bαβ − Bαβ )aα ⊗ aβ = C̄αβ
a ⊗ aβ

(1.1)

ip
where Bαβ is the intrinsic interface curvature expressed in the a basis and C̄αβ
= bαβ − Bαβ the

in-plane curvature tensor. Note that the former identically vanishes for a surface that is intrinsically
flat. The invariants of the second fundamental form b yield the mean curvature as:
H =

1 αβ
1
a bβα = bαα
2
2

and

.

(1.2)

Figure 1.1: Reference and deformed configuration of the interface. The parametrization r maps the 2D
space ξ α to the 3D space xi . The (2*2) deformation tensor F̄ip maps the deformation of a material
point ξ α in the 2D reference configuration to the 2D deformed configuration Ξα . The (3*3) deformation
tensor F̄ maps the deformation of a material point r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) in the 3D reference configuration to the
3D deformed configuration r(Ξ1 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ), Ξ2 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ))
To characterize the in-plane deformation of the interface, let us now introduce the deformation tensor
F̄:
ip β
ip
F̄ = F̄βα
a ⊗ aα with F̄βα
=

∂ξ β
∂Ξα

(1.3)

where ξ β and Ξα denote in the curvilinear coordinates of an interface material point in the reference
and deformed configuration respectively. It can further be seen that the deformation gradient can be
represented in two ways: (1) by the full deformation gradient F̄ with dimension (3*3) and (b) by the
in-plane deformation gradient F̄ip with dimension (2*2) (Fig. 1.1). To avoid complication due to rigid
body motion, it is more convenient to work with the symmetric part of the deformation gradient, or
equivalently, with the Green-Lagrange strain tensor defined as:
Ē =

1 T
ip α
(F̄ F̄ − I) = Ēαβ
a ⊗ aβ
2

(1.4)

where the identity tensor I can be written in terms of the reference configuration basis I = aαβ aα ⊗ aβ
˙ and Ē
˙ are
and Ēip is the in-plane Green-Lagrange strain. Finally, the material time derivative F̄
15

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

written:
˙ = L̄F̄
F̄

and

˙ = F̄D̄F̄T ,
Ē

(1.5)

where it can be shown that the velocity gradient L̄ has the form [132]:
L̄ =




kα
k
⊥
v̄|β − bαβ v̄ ⊥ aα ⊗ aβ + (v,α
+ bλα v̄λ )n̄ ⊗ aα

(1.6)

Here we used the normal and tangential decomposition of the interface velocity v̄ in the fixed basis
aα , such that v̄ = v̄ kα aα + v̄ ⊥ n̄ ,and the operator | indicates the covariant derivative.
With this, we have a complete description of the interface position, velocity, strain and curvature,
as well as their associated rates. The kinematics of the immersed interface are therefore known via
the knowledge of the instantaneous velocity field v̄(x, t) and the knowledge of the interface geometry
at all time. To complete the description, we next discuss the kinematics of the surrounding fluid and
its interaction with the interface.

1.1.2

Kinematics of the fluid/interface interactions

Let us now consider that the (closed) interface Γ is immersed in a fluid domain denoted by Ω. Let
us further denote as Ω− the subdomain that is enclosed within the interface and Ω+ the external
subdomain such that Ω = Ω− ∪ Ω+ . Before we turn to the governing equations for the interface/fluid
system, let us introduce the operators needed to describe the kinematics of the interaction between
the interface and the surrounding fluid. For this, we consider an arbitrary Eulerian vector field f (x, t)
(which may be the velocity) and seek a mathematical representation at a point that is very near the
interface, whose normal vector, at this location is n̄. In these conditions, it is convenient to write the
vector f in terms of its normal and tangential projections on Γ as:
f = f⊥ + fk

with f ⊥ = P⊥ · f and f k = Pk · f

(1.7)

where the normal and tangential projection operators are defined by:
k

Pij⊥ = n̄i n̄j and Pij = ai1 aj2
In addition, to account for the existence of Navier-type boundary conditions at the fluids/interface
boundary, one needs to introduce field discontinuities across Γ. Denoting v− and v+ as the fluid
velocity field v in Ω+ and Ω− respectively, it is possible to introduce discontinuities in tangential
velocity across Γ as [167]:
[v]k+ = v̄k − vk+ ,

[v]k− = vk− − v̄k

and

[v]k = vk+ − vk−

(1.8)

Further assuming that no normal separation occurs between the fluids and the interface, we obtain
the following normal velocity continuity conditions:
v⊥+ = v⊥− = v̄⊥
16

(1.9)

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

where we used the decomposition of the velocity vector in normal and tangential components as
defined in (1.7). With this formalism, it is important to realize that motion at the interface Γ and the
nearby fluids are entirely specified by the combination of three independent variables {v̄, [v]k , vk− }
or, equivalently {v̄, vk+ , vk− }.

1.1.3

Basic governing equations

Consider a two-dimensional incompressible viscous flow in the domain Ω delimited by a boundary
∂Ω in which exists a closed vesicle, with surface Γ that is able to move with the surrounding fluid.
The problem is characterized by the Reynolds number Re = HV ρ/µ where H is the characteristic
length scale, V the characteristic fluid velocity, µ the kinematic viscosity and ρ the fluid densities in
and out of the vesicle. We choose here to remain in the Stokes flow assumption with Re  1, where
inertial effect may be neglected. The velocity of a fluid particle is given in terms of its material time
derivative v(x, t) = Dx/Dt, where x is the current position of the fluid particle at time t. Under these
conditions, the governing equations and boundary conditions for the Stokes flow are written:
∇·σ = 0

∀x ∈ Ω/Γ

(1.10)

∇·v = 0

∀x ∈ Ω/Γ

(1.11)

where σ is the Cauchy stress tensor in the fluid and the second equation imposes the condition of
incompressibility. These equations are combined with the moving interface problem:
[σ · n̄] = f̄
µ
(σ · n̄)k± = ± [v]k±
l
dr(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t)
= v̄(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t)
dt

∀x ∈ Γ
∀x ∈ Γ

(1.12)
(1.13)
(1.14)

with the force f is the unbalanced interface force due to its deformation. Equation (4.17) is the Navier
boundary conditions at the interface, where l± > 0 is known as the slip length, a physical parameter
that depends on the surface roughness. The case l = 0 corresponds to the no slip condition while
l = ∞ is the free sleep condition between the fluid and the interface. Finally, the boundary condition
for fluid motion on the external boundary reads:
σ · n = po n

∀x ∈ ∂Ωp
∀x ∈ ∂Ωv .

v(x, t) = v0

(1.15)
(1.16)

where p0 is an external pressure surrounding the domain Ω, and a Dirichlet type condition can be
applied on the velocity on the sub domain ∂Ωv .

1.1.4

Constitutive equations

To complement the above system of equation, a number of constitutive relation must be introduced.
They can be broken down into three components that describe in turns: (a) the behavior of the fluid
and (b) the mechanical behavior of the interface. In this work, we consider a simple incompressible
Newtownian fluid with viscosity µ that can be different within the enclosed volume and the external
17

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

fluid.
σ = µD − pI

(1.17)

where D is the rate of deformation and p is the hydrostatic pressure enforcing the incompressibility
condition. In the case of an elastic thin membrane, a strain energy function Φ̄ = Φ̄(C̄ip , Ēip ) can be
generally defined in terms of the curvature C̄ip and strain Ēip introduced in the previous section. The
in-plane Cauchy stress T̄ip and bending moment M̄ip are then found by taking the partial derivatives
of Φ̄:
1 ip ∂ Φ̄ ipT
F̄
F̄
J
∂ Ēip

T̄ip =

and

M̄ip =

1 ∂ Φ̄
J ∂ C̄ip

(1.18)

where J is the local area dilatation of the surface and Γ0 is the surface Γ in its reference configuration.
The resulting force of the interface is then found to be [6]:
f̄

=


 
ip
ip λ
ip
ip
bα bλβ n̄
v̄ ⊥ − M̄αβ
bαβ n̄ + M̄αβ|αβ
−T̄αβ|β
aα − T̄αβ
|
{z
} |
{z
}
in-plane stress
bending moment



(1.19)

Here, the vector f̄ is the force resulting from stretching and bending the interface. Alternatively, the
case of a lipid bilayer can be considered by choosing Φ̄ to be the classical Helfrich-Canham energy
per current unit area Φ̄(C̄ip ) = κ/2(H − H0 )2 , with κ the elastic moduli and H0 the spontaneous
curvature [79]. Under these conditions, the interface force is written:
f̄

= κ(∆H +

H − H0 2
(H − 4K + HC0 ))n̄.
2

(1.20)

Finally, the simple case of surface tension at the interface between two liquids can also be modelled
by choosing the following well-known equation for the interface force, in the direction opposite to the
normal and proportional to the mean curvature:
f̄

= −γH n̄,

(1.21)

with γ the surface tension.

1.2

Numerical solution: Extended Finite element and grid-based
particle method

The solution strategy adopted here aims to attain a state of equilibrium between the interface and the
surrounding fluid by solving a sequence of steady state flow and update of the interface in a staggered
manner. As we march forward in time, the interface is first considered fixed, and the Extended Finite
Element method is used to solve the Eulerian fields v± , v̄ and p± for the system subjected to the
interface force f̄ . The coupling between the interface and the surrounding fluid is handled via the use
of Lagrange multipliers, where special care is taken in defining the right Lagrange multiplier space
along the interface [116]. This first step is described in section 4.1. Next, given the interface velocity
field v̄, section 4.2 describes how the Grid Based Particle method and a second order Runge-Kutta
18

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

time integration scheme are used to update the interface position, deformations measures as well as
the interface force f̄ for the next time step.

1.2.1

The Extended Finite Element method with directional discontinuities

The examples chosen here to illustrate the method are axisymmetrical or plane-stress and therefore
only require a two-dimensional spatial discretization. Every aspect of the method can however be
adapted in three dimensions but involve additional computational aspect (such as parallel computing
and optimization) which are beyond the scope of this study. Following classical methods for fluid
flow at low Reynolds number, the pressure and velocity fields are discretized on a two-dimensional
fixed finite element mesh and interpolated with a mixed finite element procedure [93] with (four-node)
bilinear shape functions for the pressure and (nine-node) quadratic shape functions for the velocity.
Since the framework adopted to describe the system is Eulerian, the finite element discretization is
structured and does not conform to the shape of the membrane Γ. The existence of an interface is
then accounted for by the zero-level of a level-set function φ(x) defined as the signed distance function
from the interface Γ. An illustration of this function is given in Fig. 1.2a and 1.2b. This interface
then creates discontinuities in the velocity and pressure fields within elements cut by Γ which can be
accounted for by adopting the Extended Finite Element Method (X-FEM) in which such elements are
enriched with ‘jump’ degrees of freedom, as described in [117, 20]. For example, the general rule for
interpolating the pressure p inside element e is:
e

p̃ (x, t) =

4
X
I=1

NI4 (x)pI (t)

+

4
X

NI4 (x) (H(φ(x)) − H(φ(xI ))) p̂I (t)

(1.22)

I=1

where the upper case indices I and J are used for node numbering and the NI4 are the four-node
element shape functions. The terms pI denotes the regular pressure at node I while p̂I represents the
pressure jump. Finally, the Heaviside function H(φ(x)) provides the discontinuity needed to describe
the jump in velocity and pressure across the membrane (Fig. 1.2c). In contrast to the pressure field,

Figure 1.2: (a) shows the elements split by membrane Γ and the enriched nodes (circle). The 3D
distance function can be seen in (b) where its intersection with the plan z = 0 defines Γ, and (c) shows
the Heaviside function in an element cut by Γ.
the discontinuity that affects the velocity field is directional since only the tangential components of v
are discontinuous across Γ. We here introduce a modification to the shape functions used in X-FEM
19

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

by making the discontinuity directional as follows:
ṽie (x, t)

=

9
X

NJ9 (x)viJ (t)

J=1

+

9
X

NJ9 (x)(H(φ(x, t)) − H(φ(xJ , t)))aJi (t)v̂ J (t),

(1.23)

J=1

where the lower case i indicates the component of a vector and N 9 are the nine-node element shape
functions. The term aJi represents the ith component of the covariant tangent vector to Γ at node
J and provides the tangential direction for the velocity jump v̂ J at node J. With this method of
interpolation, the normal velocity continuity condition v ⊥+ = v ⊥− is automatically satisfied across
Γ, and the jump in tangential velocity is reduced to a scalar v̂ J multiplied by the tangent vector aJi .
Note that in the three-dimensional case, the jump discontinuity becomes a two-dimensional vector in
the plane tangent to the interface.
Remark: Although the condition v ⊥+ = v ⊥− ensures the continuity of the velocity field across the
interface, a jump in the viscosity of the fluid across the interface can cause kink in the velocity field,
i.e. a discontinuity in the velocity gradient in the normal direction across the interface. This can
easily be taken into account with the help of an additional enrichment that incorporates a piecewise
affine ‘hat’ function. For the sake of simplicity, we choose to keep the same viscosity on either side of
the interface.

Figure 1.3: (a) shows how the mesh nodes 1 through 4 are used to discretize the Lagrange multipliers
and interface velocity (circled nodes) and (b) shows the value taken by the shape functions N̄1 and
N̄2 in each element e1 to e5 cut by the interface. Each tick along the absisse One can note that the
interpolation of the Lagrange multipliers is constant in e2 while e4 and e5 share the same Lagrange
multipliers.
Finally, to compute the motion of the interface and couple it to the nearby fluids, let us introduce the
Lagrange multipliers λp , λ+ and λ− used in combination with the membrane velocity v̄ k to enforce
(4.16) and (4.17). Special care needs to be given to the discretization of the Lagrange multipliers along
the interface in the context of the X-FEM. Indeed, a ‘naive’ discretization, i.e. a Lagrange multiplier at
each intersection between the interface and the underlying mesh, leads to a Lagrange multiplier space
that does not satisfy the so-called inf-sup (or LBB) condition [57]. This in turn creates oscillations in
the Lagrange multiplier field along the interface and affects the convergence rate. To address this issue
20

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

we here choose to use the method developed by Möes et al in [116] to construct the correct Lagrange
multiplier space and discretize the fields v̄ k , λp , λ+ and λ− on nodes of the underlying Eulerian mesh
(Fig. 1.3a), which we will refer to as the M-discretization. Each selected node carry the following four
+K and λ−K . These fields are interpolated along the section Γe of Γ
degrees of freedom: v̄ kK , λK
p , λ

that cuts element e as follows:
v̄˜ke (ξ, t) =

2
X

N̄K (ξ)v̄

kK

(t) ,

λ̃ep

=

K=1

2
X

N̄K (ξ)λK
p (t)

, λ̃

±e

=

K=1

2
X

N̄K (ξ)λ±K (t)

(1.24)

K=1

where N̄I are one-dimensional two-node shape functions and the coordinate ξ runs along Γe (Fig 1.3b).
More detail about the discretization algorithm that construct the Lagrange multiplier space can be
found in [116].

1.2.2

Weak formulation

Introducing the test functions wv , wp , wv̄k , wλp , wλ+ and wλ− , integrating by parts and using the
divergence theorem, the weak form of the governing equations (4.14)-(4.17) in the fluid domain can
be written as: given the position r of the interface Γ at time t, find v ∈ V, p ∈ P, v̄ k ∈ L, λp ∈ L,
λ+ ∈ L and λ− ∈ L such that for all wv ∈ V, wp ∈ P, wv̄k ∈ L, wλp ∈ L wλ+ ∈ L and wλ− ∈ L :



µ
µ
(∇wv , µ∇v)Ω − (∇wv , pI)Ω + wv , + λ+ − − λ− + wv , f̄ Γ = 0
l
l
Γ
(wp , ∇ · v)Ω + (wp , λp )Γ = 0
(wλp , [p])Γ + (wλp , f̄ ⊥ )Γ





µ 
µ 
wv̄k , + λ+ + [v]k+ + − −λ− + [v]k−
+ wv̄k , f̄ k
l
l 
Γ
Γ

µ k+ 
k+
wλ+ , (σ · n̄) − + [v]
l
Γ


µ k− 
k−
wλ− , (σ · n̄) − − [v]
l
Γ

= 0
= 0
= 0
= 0

(1.25)

After a long but straightforward calculation using the discretized form of v, p, v̄ k , v̄ ⊥ and λ± (given
in the appendix) , the weak form (1.25) at time t can conveniently be written in the following format:
"

Kt

It2

It1

K̄t

# "
·

d(t)
d̄(t)

#

"
+

Ftf
F̄tf

#
= 0

(1.26)

where d is a vector composed of the bulk degrees of freedom d(t) = [v(t) p(t)]> while d̄ corresponds to

>
the interface degrees of freedom d̄(t) = v̄ k (t) λp (t) λ+ (t) λ− (t) . It can be seen that the component
Kt of the tangent matrix corresponds to the fluid domain, the component K̄t is associated with the
interface while It1 and It2 can be thought of as the fluid/interface interaction matrices. The global
force vector [Ftf F̄tf ]T , which include both external forces and the interface force at time t, as well as
the tangent matrix components Kt , K̄t , It1 and It2 are assembled from their element constituents as
21

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

follows:
t
Ftf = Anel
e=1 Ff e

¯

t
, F̄tf = Anel
e=1 F̄f e



¯

It1 = Anel
e



¯
, Kt = Anel
Kte , K̄t = Anel
K̄te ,
e
e


¯
Ite 1
and It2 = Anel
Ite 2
e



¯ respectively denote the conventional FEM assembly operator, the total element
where Ae , nel and nel
number and the number of elements cut by Γ. While precise expressions are provided in the appendix,
the submatrix and subvectors appearing in (1.26) take the form:

"
Kte

=

Kevv Kevp
Kepv

0

"
Ite 2

=

0

#
K̄te

,

0

0 Kepλp

Kev̄k v̄k

0 Kev̄k λ+



0
= 
 Ke
 λ+ v̄k
Keλ− v̄k

Kevλ+

Kevλ−

0

0

Kev̄k λ−

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

,

Ftf e

#

"
=

Fev
Fep





Kev̄k v

0





 , Ite 1 =  0

 Ke

 λ+ v
Keλ− v

Fe k
#
 ev̄
 Fλ
p
and F̄tf e = 
 0

0




Keλp p 
 (1.27)
0 

0







(1.28)

Remark: The computation of these quantities involves the assessment of integrals over elements
that can be numerically evaluated using Gaussian quadrature with four integration points in regular
elements. However, to carry out the integration over the two sides of Γ in split elements, a division
into sub-triangles is required as described in [117].
The finite element equation (1.26) can be solved with a linear solver to yield an expression for the
fluid and interface velocities at time t. Given the interface velocity v̄(t), the position of Γ and its
deformation measures C̄t , Ēt and F̄t are then updated using an explicit second order Runge-Kutta
time integration scheme to compute Kt+dt
and Ft+dt
for the next time step. Convergence is achieved
e
e
once the two following criteria are met:
1. The pressure and velocity fields of the fluid surrounding the interface are constant with respect
to time. This criterion is met when ||vreg (t+dt)−vreg (t)|| < T OLv and ||preg (t+dt)−preg (t)|| <
T OLp , where vreg (t) and preg (t) are the vectors of all regular fluid pressure and velocity degrees
of freedom at each node, and T OLv and T OLp the user defined tolerances for the velocity and
pressure.
2. The interface tangential velocity field is constant with respect to time. Here, since the number of
degrees of freedom associated with the interface changes at each iteration, we rely on the particles
tracking the interface (described in the next section) to compare the interface velocity field
k

k

between two time steps. The second criterion is therefore written ||v̄p (t + dt) − v̄p (t)|| < T OLv̄k ,
k

k

with v̄p (t+dt) and v̄p (t) the tangential velocity of the interface interpolated at the same particles
at times t and t + dt.
Once criteria (1) and (2) are satisfied, the algorithm has converged and the interface is in equilibrium
with the surrounding fluid. The next step involves the transport of the interface using a mesh-based
particle method, as discussed in the next section.
22

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

1.2.3

Tracking the evolution of the interface

Traditionally, the temporal evolution of an interface in an Eulerian framework is handled with the
level-set evolution equation [54]. This has the main advantage of turning the evolution of the interface
into seeking the solution of a partial differential equation, removing the need for surface parameterization or meshing. A main issue with this class of methods within the context of our study is
that a levelset formulation is usually not adapted to contain Lagrangian informations on an interface,
which may include strain and concentration fields. They also suffer from the fact that they generally
cannot capture in-plane, interface shear deformation since such instances are not associated with a
normal interface velocity (the latter being the main component of the level-set evolution equation).
To circumvent these limitations, we choose here to use a grid-based particle method similar to what
was introduced in [102]. This method indeed possesses the double advantage of tracking the interface
explicitly with particles that contain lagrangian information while using the underlying fixed finite
element mesh to ensure a fairly uniform repartition of the particles on the interface. Here we summarize the grid based particle method and discuss the update of the interface position and deformations
measures.

Figure 1.4: Figure (a) shows the sampling of Γ by the particles y represented by a circle while the
associated nodes p inside the computational tube λtube are represented by crosses. Figure (b) shows
˜ denotes the velocity
the second order Runge-Kutta time integration of the evolution of the interface: v̄
of the interface interpolated at the particle’s position while Ω is the angular velocity of the interface’s
normal n̄.
The particles, whose position vector is denoted by y, are chosen as the normal projection of the
underlying mesh nodes, with position vector p, on Γ. Initially, the interface is described implicitly as
the zero level-set of a signed distance function φ(p, t = 0). The initial coordinates of particles y can
then found as follows:
y = p − φ(p, 0)∇φ(p, 0)

(1.29)

To limit the number of particles, we define a so-called computational tube such that only nodes p
whose distance to Γ is smaller than a cut-off value λtube are accounted for (Fig. 1.4a). It is important
to note here that there is a one to one correspondence between each particle y and node p. This
ensures a quasi-uniform repartition of particles along the interface throughout its evolution. Between
23

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

˜ (ξ, t) and using
two subsequent time steps, the particles are moved according to the interface velocity v̄
a second order Runge-Kutta time integration procedure as follows (Fig. 1.4b):
˜ (yt , t)
yt+dt/2 = yt + v̄

dt
dt2
˜ (yt , t)
+ Ω · v̄
2
4

(1.30)

˜ (yt+dt/2 , t)
˜ (yt+dt/2 , t)dt + Ω · v̄
yt+dt = yt + v̄

dt2
,
2

(1.31)

where Ω is the matricial form of the angular velocity of the interface normal [88]:


dn̄
⊥
= ω × n̄ , ω = − v,α
+ bλα v kλ aα and Ωik = ijk ωj
dt

(1.32)

with ijk the permutation tensor. After the motion of the interface, the particles y may not be the
closest point on Γ to their associated nodes p. Moreover, the motion of the particles may cause
their distribution on Γ to become uneven, which can affect the geometrical resolution of the interface.
To overcome this issue, the interface is ressampled after motion by recomputing the particles as the
closest points on Γ to the nodes p inside the updated computational tube (which has moved with
the interface). This is done by first locally approximating the interface with polynomials around each
particle. The procedure, explained here in the two dimensional case, is as follows: for each node p
inside the computational tube, the closest m particles y0 ...ym are collected, carrying with them the
tangent at0 ...atm and normal n̄t0 ...n̄tm to the interface before motion. Denoting y0 as the particle closest
to p, a polynomial of degree n < m is fitted to the particles y0 ...ym in the local coordinate system
{at0 ; n̄t0 } centered on y0 . The location ỹi of particle i in this local coordinate system is given by:
(
ỹi =

ξi1
ξi2

)

"
= Rt · (yi − y0 ) with Rt =

(at0 )T
(n̄t0 )T

#
.

(1.33)

Taking the example of a quadratic polynomial (n = 2), the interface around particle y0 is represented
in the local referential as the graph function ξ 2 (ξ 1 ) = c0 +c1 ξ 1 +c2 (ξ 1 )2 , where the coefficients c0 , c1 and
c2 are found by minimizing the L2 difference between the ξ 2 (ξi1 ) and the ξi2 . This method of interface
approximation can be generalized in three dimension [102], where a quadratic graph function would
take the form ξ 3 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) = c00 + c10 ξ 1 + c01 ξ 2 + c11 ξ 1 ξ 2 + c20 (ξ 1 )2 + c02 (ξ 2 )2 , as shown in Fig. 3.3. The

Figure 1.5: Local polynomial approximation of the surface (and of any Lagrangian field). The polynomial ξ 3 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) that approximates the interface is constructed via least square fitting using neighbouring
2t
t
particles in the local referential {a1t
0 , a0 , n̄0 } centered on particle y0 .
24

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES


	
coordinates ξ 1 , ξ 2 , ξ 3 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) defines a local parameterization rl (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) of Γ in the neighbourhood of
y0 (Fig. 1.4b):

rl (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) =





ξ1




ξ 3 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 )





ξ2

.

(1.34)




The relationship between the local parameterization rl (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) and the global parameterization r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 )
defined in section 1.1.1 is then found via rotation and translation operations in the form:
r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t + dt) = (Rt )−1 rl (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) + y0 .

(1.35)

The parameterization r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t + dt) can now be used to ressample the interface, i.e. recalculate
the closest point on the interface to the nodes p. This is done by minimizing the distance function


d(r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t + dt); p) = 1/2 r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t + dt) − p with respect to ξ 1 and ξ 2 . In three dimensions, this
requires the use of an iterative solver, which for small dt is given a good initial guess and converges very
quickly. In two dimensions however, the solution can be found explicitly by solving a cubic equation.
The quality of approximation of a two-dimensional interface when fitted to a circle using the sequence
of second order polynomials detailed above is shown in Table I. It is found that the L2 error e2 in the
position of the particles decreases with the size of the underlying mesh at with a convergence rate of
approximately 4.
mesh size h
e2

0.4
2.87 × 10−2

0.2
1.73 × 10−3

0.1
1.12 × 10−4

0.05
6.97 × 10−6

Table 1.1: L2 error in the position of particles when fitted to a circle.
This is in perfect agreement with results found in [102] and comes from the fact that both the
circle and the polynomials are even functions. The approximation error should therefore be of fourth
order since there
n are no contribution
o from third order terms. Other geometrical quantities such as the
updated basis a1t+dt , a2t+dt , n̄t+dt

are then found using the parameterization r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t + dt):

∂rl (ξ 1 , ξ 2 )
∂ξ α
t+dt
t+dt
t+dt
t+dt
= a1 × a2 /|a1 × a2 |.

at+dt
= r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t + dt),α = Rt
α

(1.36)

n̄t+dt

(1.37)

t+dt
t+dt · n̄t+dt can also be
The metric aαβ
= aαt+dt · at+dt
or the second fundamental form bt+dt
β
αβ = −aα
,β

directly obtained from equations (5.42), (5.43), (5.39) and their derivatives.
Finally, the new level-set function φ(p, t + dt) is calculated as the signed distance function to Γ at
nodes p as follows [102]:
φ(p, t + dt) = −sgn(

yt+dt − p
· n̄t )|yt+dt − p|,
|yt+dt − p| 0

(1.38)

where yt+dt is the particle associated with p at time t + dt and the sign function sgn(((yt+dt −
p)/|yt+dt − p|) · n̄t0 ) determines whether node p is in Ω+ or Ω− . The reconstruction of the level-set
25

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

function using the local polynomial approximation of the interface is computationally inexpensive,
and is used the X-FEM part of the algorithm (1.22) and (1.23).

1.2.4

Update of the interface deformation

In addition to the interface geometry, the sampling particles also carry lagrangian fields associated
with the interface, such as the deformation gradient. The deformation gradient F̄ is updated at
each particle yt in their respective basis {at0 1 , at0 2 , n̄t0 } using the rate equation (1.5) and the velocity
gradient L̄ (1.6) as follows (Fig. 1.6a and 1.6b):
L̄t =




k
k
⊥
+ btλα v̄˜λ )n̄t0 ⊗ aα0 t
v̄˜α|β − btαβ v̄˜⊥ aα0 t ⊗ aβ0 t + (v̄˜,α

(F̄t )0 = F̄t exp (L̄t dt),

(1.39)
(1.40)

where v̄˜ is the interface velocity interpolated at particle yt using equation (1.24). Next, the updated
, n̄t+dt } to yield F̄t+dt (Fig. 1.6c and
, at+dt
deformation gradient (F̄t )0 is rotated into the basis {at+dt
2
1
1.6d.):
F̄t+dt = (F̄t )0 (Rt+dt
)T with Rt+dt
= (Rt )−1 Rt+dt .
t
t

(1.41)

Similarly to the polynomials that approximates the geometry of the interface in section 4.2, a new
set of polynomials is constructed to interpolate the deformation gradient around each particle. The
second order polynomial that approximates the deformation gradient F̄t+dt around a particle yt+dt is
written:
αβ 2 2
αβ 1 2
αβ 1 2
αβ 2
αβ 1
t+dt
(ξ1 , ξ2 , t) = cαβ
F̄αβ
0,0 + c1,0 ξ + c0,1 ξ + c1,1 ξ ξ + c2,0 (ξ ) + c0,2 (ξ ) ,

(1.42)

where the coefficients cαβ
i,j are found with the method of least square fitting, using the values of the
deformation gradient at the neighbouring particle. Thanks to the local polynomial reconstructions,

Figure 1.6: Update and transport of the deformation gradient F̄: (a) the fluid and interface velocity
field are first computed by solving (1.26). The interface velocity field v̄ is then used to update F̄ in the
basis {at0 1 , at0 2 , n̄t0 } (b). Finally, the interface position is updated (c) and the deformation gradient is
rotated in the basis {a1t+dt , a2t+dt , n̄t+dt } to yield F̄t+dt (d).
the deformation gradient F̄t+dt can be interpolated anywhere on the interface Γ. The Green-Lagrange
deformation tensor and the jacobian of the deformation are then computed as:
Ēt+dt =


1  t+dt t+dt T
F̄
(F̄
) −I
and J t+dt = det (F̄t+dt )
2
26

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Once the different deformation measures of the interface are updated, one can compute the interface
force f̄ anywhere on Γ using equation (1.19). Given the new interface force f̄ , the algorithm turns
back to the X-FEM and computes the velocity and pressure fields for the new time step, as shown in
Fig. 1.7.

27

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Figure 1.7: General flowchart: the different velocity and pressure fields are solved using the X-FEM
while the tracking and update of the interface geometry and Lagrangian fields is achieved using the
grid based particle method.

28

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

1.3

Numerical examples

We now consider several numerical examples with the aim of validating the proposed model and illustrating its ability to simulate some cases of extreme membrane deformations occurring in engineering
and biological problems.

1.3.1

Convergence study

Here we first address the ill-conditioning of the tangent matrix usually associated with X-FEM formulation, and verify that the Lagrange multiplier space obtained using the M-discretization leads to
stable fields on the interface. We then investigate the convergence of the error made in calculating
the flow velocity and pressure around a fixed, rigid spherical capsule. Finally, we allow the capsule to
elastically deform in contact with the surrounding fluid and study the CFL condition in time step dt
for the temporal evolution of the interface.
X-FEM ill-condition and Lagrange multiplier discretization
A common issue that arises in X-FEM formulations is the typically ill-conditioned tangent matrix in
(1.26) [67]. This is caused by the interface cutting through elements in a way that leaves very little
support for the enrichment functions (Fig. 3.7a). This can lead to large oscillations in the pressure
and velocity fields and affect the rate of convergence.
Several methods have been developed to address that issue, such as using a modified step enrichment function [8], or applying X-FEM specific preconditioners [14, 113]. Here we choose to use the
enriched degrees of freedom (EDOF) blocking strategy, which consists in removing the EDOF that
have very little support, as described in [139]. This method has the advantage of using the following
simple geometrical criterion to determine which enriched degree of freedom should be neutralized.
−
Inside each element cut by the interface, the areas A+
e and Ae on each side of the interface are com-

puted. The EDOF that are to be neutralized correspond to those whose algebraic sign of the level-set
value is opposite to that of the phase occupying the larger area in each cut element, and which only
belong to elements where the following condition holds true [139]:
−
min(A+
e , Ae )
−
max(A+
e , Ae )

< Cblock ,

(1.43)

where Cblock  1 is a user-defined constant. The EDOF p̂I and v̂ I that satisfy these conditions are
‘removed’ by enforcing the following Dirichlet conditions:
p̂I = 0

and

v̂ I = 0

(1.44)

To investigate the effect of blocking the poorly supported EDOF on the pressure field across the
interface, let us consider the case of an the inflation of an elastic circle of initial radius R0 . The circle
is endowed with the following strain energy φ̄(Ēip ) =

1 ip
2 Ē

: C : Ēip , where the fourth order tensor C

is the elasticity tensor and can be written in the case of an isotropic linear material as C = λ̄1⊗1+2µ̄I,
with λ̄ and µ̄ the first and second Lamé coefficients. A point source is placed at the center of the circle
until its enclosed area has doubled (Fig. 3.7). Once the point source is removed, the exact solution
29

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Figure 1.8: (a) inflation of an elastic circle with a point source at its center and (b) numerical solution
at equilibrium.

to this problem is given by (4.16) as:
[p] = f ⊥ ∀x ∈ Γ.

(1.45)

ip
/R, with R the current
where the interface elastic force f ⊥ can be calculated using (1.19) as f ⊥ = T̄11
ip
ip
= (λ̄ +
that arises from stretching the circle is written T̄11
radius of the circle and the stress T̄11
ip
ip
ip ip
can easily be calculated as:
and Ē11
F̄11 . The deformation measures F̄11
2µ̄)Ē11
ip
=
F̄11
ip
Ē11

=

R
R0
1
2

(1.46)


R
R0

!

2

−1

(1.47)

Fig. 1.9a shows the jump of pressure across the interface as a function of angle θ along the circle
(Fig. 3.7a) with mesh size h = R/10. One observes that blocking selected EDOF removes the large
oscillations of pressure across the interface that otherwise appear when using the unmodified X-FEM.
The second column of table II presents the infinite norm of the error ||e[p] ||∞ made in the pressure
jump across the interface, which is observed to drop considerably when the EDOF blocking strategy
is used.

case
X-FEM
X-FEM, Cblock = 0.001

||e[p] ||∞
1.64
6.21 × 10−2

||e[σ·n̄]k ||∞
1.95
4.12 × 10−2

Table 1.2: Maximum pressure and tangential stress jump error using the unmodified X-FEM the
EDOF blocking strategy.
Remark: Since the normal force f ⊥ of the interface in (1.45) is a function of the interface defor30

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Figure 1.9: (a) jump of pressure field and (b) jump of tangential viscous stress as a function of angle
θ along the interface using both the unmodified X-FEM as well as with the EDOF blocking strategy.

mation measure Ēip , the above example also ensures that the deformation of the interface is properly
updated as the circle inflates to its final size.
Next, in order to investigate the behavior of the jump in tangent viscous stress across the interface, we turn to the case of a circle spinning in an infinite expanse of fluid. A tangential force f k is
applied to the interface and the jump of tangent viscous stress across the interface is computed along
the circle (Fig. 3.8). The exact solution for the jump of viscous stress in this problem is given by
(4.16):
[σ · n̄]k = f k ∀x ∈ Γ.

(1.48)

The jump of viscous stress is shown in Fig. 1.9b as a function of angle θ around the interface.
Similarly to the pressure jump, the oscillations in the tangential viscous stress jump disappear with
the neutralization of selected EDOF. The last column of table II shows that the infinite norm of
the error ||e[σ·n̄]k ||∞ made in computing the jump of tangential viscous stress across the interface
behaves in a similar manner as ||e[p] ||∞ . Here we chose the slip length on both sides of the interface
as l+ = l− = 0, which correspond to a ‘stick’ boundary condition between the fluid and the interface.
Finally, let us turn to the Lagrange multiplier fields discretized on the interface Γ. Fig. 1.11a
presents the Lagrange multiplier field λp that enforces the pressure jump around the interface for the
case of the inflating elastic circle while Fig. 1.11b shows the field λ+ that enforces the ‘stick’ boundary
31

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Figure 1.10: (a) circle spinning in an infinite expanse of fluid under the action of a tangential force
and (b) numerical result for the pressure and velocity field.

condition for the case of the spinning circle, using both the ‘naive’ and the M-discretization presented
in section 3.1. We observe that using the M-discretization considerably reduces the large oscillations
that are otherwise present in the fields λp and λ+ when using the ‘naive’ discretization.

Figure 1.11: Lagrange multiplier field λp (a) and λ+ (b) along the interface as a function of angle θ,
using both the ‘naive’ and the M-discretization.
The EDOF blocking strategy used in combination with the proper Lagrange multiplier space are
therefore shown to appropriately address both the ill-conditioning of the stiffness matrix K and the
oscillations of the Lagrange multiplier fields along the interface.

Rigid spherical shell
Let us consider a uniform incompressible flow past a rigid spherical shell, and investigate the difference
between model’s prediction and the analytical solution of the flow velocity and pressure around the
sphere with ‘slip’ or ‘stick’ boundary conditions at its surface. Analytically, the solution of the Stokes
flow for an infinite expanse of fluid around a rigid sphere is given, in spherical coordinates (Fig. 1.12a),
32

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

by [96]:
vr =

1
r2 sin2 (θ)

∂Ψstokes
−1 ∂Ψstokes
, vθ =
, vφ = 0
∂θ
r sin θ ∂r

(1.49)

where Ψstokes is the Stokes stream function that takes the form in the ‘stick’ and ‘slip’ cases, respectively [96]:

R2
2
− 3Rr + 2r
r

U
2
2
Ψslip
stokes (r, θ) = sin (θ) 2 −Rr + r .

Ψstick
stokes (r, θ)

U
= sin (θ)
4
2



(1.50)
(1.51)

with R is the radius of the sphere and U is the flow velocity away from the sphere vr→∞ = U . In
+
our model, the ‘stick’ condition corresponds to a Navier boundary condition with lslip
= 0 while the

‘slip’ boundary condition requires lslip >> R. We first investigate the convergence of the error made

Figure 1.12: (a) Finite element mesh and boundary conditions, (b) pressure field and velocity stream
line for the fluid flowing around the sphere and (c) convergence of the error made on the pressure on
the surface of the sphere as the mesh size decreases.
in calculating the pressure at the surface of the rigid sphere as the mesh size h is decreased. We define
the L2 -error in pressure as :
e2p

=

1
πpmax

Z

Π

2

(pexact (r = R, θ) − pnum (r = R, θ)) dθ

1/2
(1.52)

0

where pexact can easily be obtained from knowing the Stokes stream functions appearing in (1.50) and
(1.51), pmax = max(pexact (r = R, θ)) and pnum is the pressure calculated numerically. Fig. 1.12b
presents the pressure field around the sphere for the ‘stick’ case while Fig. 1.12c (log-log scale) shows
that the error made in calculating the pressure converges to zero like O((h/R)3 ), for both extreme
cases l+ = 0 (stick) and l+ >> R (slip). The Reynolds number chosen in those simulations is
Re = RU ρ/(µ) = 0.05, at which inertia forces can be neglected. The solid and doted lines show the
33

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

power law fitting of the error, calculated as:
ep f it = k1 (h/R)k2

(1.53)

where k2 ∼ 3 is an approximation of the rate of convergence. This is in excellent agreement with the
convergence study done for the grid-based particle method performed in [102].

Figure 1.13: Simulation and analytical results of the velocity (a) and pressure (b) for different slip
lengths
Figs. 1.13a and 1.13b respectively show the vertical flow velocity vθ (r, θ = π/2) and the surface pressure p(r = R, θ) for a rigid sphere with different slip length, ranging from l+ = 0 (‘stick’ condition) to
l+ >> R (‘slip’ condition). We observe an excellent agreement between the analytical and numerical
results for the vertical flow velocity vθ (r, θ = π/2) and surface pressure p(r = R, θ) in both the ‘stick’
and ‘slip’ cases. Intermediate values of l+ show the capability of the model to continuously transition
from a ‘stick’ to ‘slip’ boundary condition. As we increase the slip length from l+ = 0, the tangential
velocity jump increases (Fig. 1.13a) while the viscous shear stress at the surface of the sphere decreases
since (σ · n̄)k+ = (µ[v]+ )/l+ , which in turn lowers the pressure exerted by the fluid on the surface.
Remark: In the enrichment functions that allow the tangential velocity jump for l >> R, we use
the tangent vectors calculated from the second order polynomials that approximate the interface. However, the Gaussian quadrature used to calculate the stiffness matrix in split elements uses a subset
of triangles, which leads to a piece-wise linear interface. This inconsistency is believed to lead to the
suboptimal convergence rates observed in the coarsest 4 mesh sizes in Fig.1.14b.
Soft spherical shell
The convergence study shown in Fig. 1.12 is only valid for a fixed, rigid interface. Next, we show
convergence with evolution of the interface by allowing the elastic spherical capsule to deform in contact
with the surrounding fluid, while its top extremity remains fixed. We first endow the capsule with
elastic mechanical properties. To this end, we write the capsule’s strain energy function φ̄(Ēip , C̄ip )
34

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Figure 1.14: Convergence of the error made in conserving the enclosed volume (a) and residual velocity
(b) as the mesh size decreases, for ∆t ∼ O(h/R)4 and for different slip lengths
as the sum of a quadratic potential function of Ēip and the Helfrich surface energy function of the
mean curvature H [78]:
φ̄(Ēip , C̄ip ) =

1 ip
κ
Ē : C : Ēip + (H − H0 )2 ,
2
2

(1.54)

where the spontaneous curvature was taken to be H0 = 0. Next, to characterize the capsule’s elasticity
relative to the fluid velocity, we introduce a dimensionless parameter G = (µU )/E, where E =
µ̄(3λ̄ + 2µ̄)/(λ̄ + µ̄) is the in-plane elastic modulus of the capsule. The membrane Poisson’s ratio was
taken to be ν = λ̄/(2(λ̄ + µ̄)) = 0.25. A second parameter Eb = κ/(R2 E) relates the bending elasticity
κ to E.
We show in Fig. 1.14 the convergence of the residual velocity of the membrane as well as the error
made in conserving the enclosed volume when the capsule reaches equilibrium, for values of G and Eb
that produces large deformations of the capsule’s membrane, e.g. G = 0.1 and Eb = 0.01. Fig. 1.14a
shows that for both cases l+ = 0 and l+ >> R , the velocity residual converges like O(h/R)2 . This
is consistent with the convergence rate found [102] and the fact that we used a second-order RungeKutta algorithm in time discretization. Furthermore, the error made in conserving the enclosed volume
converges like O(h/R)3 . However, due to the presence of fourth order terms in the membrane bending
force, the explicit time evolutive simulations are subjected to a strict Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL)
condition on the time step of the fourth order in mesh size ∆t ∼ O(h/R)4 [101].
The shapes adopted at equilibrium by the capsule with l+ = 0 and for different values of G are shown
in Fig. 1.15a. As expected, one can see that the capsule deformation increases with the ratio of the
fluid velocity to capsule elasticity. Fig. 1.15b illustrates the effect of the slip length l+ on the capsule
deformation for G = 0.1. As the slip length increases, the pressure exerted on the capsule decreases,
which in turn reduces the deformation. Furthermore, Fig. 1.15b shows the fluid velocity profiles along
a direction normal to the capsule at the points A and B respectively for l+ >> R and l+ = 0. The
discontinuity in tangential velocity between the fluid and the membrane is clearly apparent in the case
l+ >> R, while setting l+ = 0 ensures a continuous tangential velocity that decreases to zero at the
35

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Figure 1.15: figure (a) shows the capsule deformations for different values of G while figure (c) shows
the effect of the slip length on the capsule deformation and velocity profile. Figure (c) shows the fluid
streamlines around the capsule and the surface jacobian J. The time step used was ∆t = (h/R) × 1e−4
and the tolerances T OLv = T OLp = T OLv̄k = 1e−5
surface of the capsule. As the capsule deforms under the action of the fluid flow, the jacobian J of the
deformation represented as a color gradient on the surface in Fig. 1.15c is shown to take very large
values around the fixed extremity. The particle ressampling ensures that the spatial discretization and
the geometrical resolution of the membrane remains uniform throughout the simulation.

1.3.2

Capsule in shear flow

Our second example now investigates the equilibrium shapes of an initially circular capsule in shear
flow, with the objectives of replicating the results from [152] for validation and showing the effect of slip
length on the deformation and ‘tank-threading’ motion. The capsule is endowed with the same elastic
properties as (1.54) and its initial circular shape corresponds to an in-plane stress free configuration.
However, since the spontaneous curvature H0 is chosen to be zero (which corresponds to a flat surface),
the capsule has a non-zero bending energy at time t = 0. The capsule is subjected to a shear flow
on the top and bottom boundaries of the computational domain of size Lx by Ly , as shown in Fig.
1.16. The shear flow is characterized by a shear rate kshear with v = (kshear y, 0). The magnitude
of the shear flow relative to the capsule’s elasticity is captured by the dimensionless parameter G
such that G = (µkshear R)/E. The ratio between the bending elasticity κ and the in-plane elasticity
E constitutes a second dimensionless parameter written as Eb = κ/(R2 E). The Reynolds number
in these simulations is calculated as Re = (4R2 kshear ρ)/(µ) and is set to 0.05, where inertia effects
36

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Figure 1.16: Figure (a) shows the computational domain and the boundary conditions for the elastic
capsule in shear flow.
can be neglected. The size of the computational domain is Lx = 4R by Ly = 4R and is discretized
using square elements of size h = 0.1R, as this was shown to be sufficient to make the simulation
independent of the mesh size.

Figure 1.17: Figures (a) and (b) show the pressure fields, streamlines and velocity magnitude for the
steady states of a capsule in shear flow, with respectively stick and slip surfaces. The time step used
was ∆t = (h/R) × 1e−4 and the tolerances T OLv = T OLp = T OLv̄k = 1e−5
Fig. 1.17a and 1.17b show the streamlines, velocity magnitude and pressure field for the ‘stick’ l+ = 0
and ‘slip’ l+ >> R capsules at steady state. As expected, the effect of the capsule’s surface property
is quite apparent: for the same values of G and Eb , the ‘stick’ capsule clearly displays a tank threading
motion, as observed in [152]. However, the tank threading motion is totally absent for a ‘slip’ capsule.
The magnitude of the pressure field and the capsule deformation are also much higher in the ‘stick’
than in the ‘slip’ case since a greater slip length increases the viscous shear stress around the capsule.
The equilibrium shapes of the capsule with different values of Eb are shown in Fig. 1.18, in the ‘slip’
and ‘stick’ case. One can see that the effect of the bending elasticity has a direct impact on the
37

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Figure 1.18: Figure shows the capsule deformation with different bending rigidities in the cases (a)
l+ = 0 (stick) and (b) l+ >> R (slip).

Figure 1.19: Figures (a) and (b) show the Taylor deformation parameter Dxy as a function of the
non-dimensional time kshear t for different bending rigidities in the stick and slip cases respectively.
The black dots in (a) represent data point from [152].

equilibrium shapes of the capsules: a higher bending rigidity reduces the curvature at both ends of the
capsule and for a high enough value of Eb , the capsule undergoes almost no deformation. Here again,
the effect of surface properties can be observed as the deformations of a ‘slip’ capsule are smaller
compared to the ‘stick’ case, for equal bending elasticity. More quantitatively, the temporal evolution
of the Taylor deformation parameter is presented in Fig. 1.19. The Taylor deformation parameter
is defined by Dxy = (a − b)/(a + b), where a and b are the length and width of the capsule. The
black dots in Fig.1.19a represent data points from [152] for the ‘stick’ case. Although the Taylor
deformation parameter appears somewhat lower for Eb = 0 and Eb = 0.025, the temporal evolution
of the capsule in the ‘stick’ case are in very good agreement with the results from [152]. The ‘slip’
boundary condition is shown to decrease the maximum value of the Taylor deformation parameter
compared to the ‘stick’ case for the same bending rigidities Eb in Fig. 1.19b.
38

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

1.3.3

Pipette aspiration

Let us now turn to the aspiration of an immersed liquid droplet into a spherical channel (which
corresponds to the tip of a pipette for example), where the fluid/interface and membrane/interface
interactions as well as the large deformations play an essential role. We choose to investigate the well
studied case of an incompressible liquid droplet with surface tension γ and radius Rc being aspired
into a pipette of radius Rp by a constant pressure gradient ∆p = Pex − Pin , where Pex and Pin are
respectively the pressure outside and inside the pipette (Fig. 1.20a). There exists a critical surface

Figure 1.20: Figure (a) shows the pipette aspiration geometry and figure (b) shows the analytical and
numerical results for the penetration length Lp as a function of capillarity G. The time step used was
∆t = (h/R) × 1e−2 and the tolerances T OLv = T OLp = T OLv̄k = 1e−5
tension γcrit such that for γ < γcrit the droplet is entirely aspired into the pipette whereas for γ > γcrit ,
the droplet is partially uptaken and reaches mechanical equilibrium at the entry of the pipette [53].
This allows us to characterize the droplet/pipette system with two dimensionless numbers: a version
of the capillarity number G = γ/γcrit and the dimensionless radius Rp = Rp /Rc .
For values of G > 1, the equilibrium shape of the partially aspired droplet can found analytically as
follows. Considering that at equilibrium the velocity field vanishes and the pressure in the droplet is
constant, the Laplace law combined with some geometrical considerations yields the following system
of equations that describe the pressure and shape of the droplet at equilibrium [53]:
peq − pin
2γ
peq − pex
2γ

=

2Lp eq
+ L2p eq

Rp2

= β(8Rc3 − 3Rp2 Lp eq − L3p eq )−1/3

(1.55)
(1.56)

where peq and Lp eq are respectively the pressure and the distance travelled by the droplet inside the
pipette when it reaches equilibrium, and we used the fact that the interface force caused by the droplet
39

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

surface tension is given by (1.21) as:
f̄

= γH n̄.

Fig. 1.20b shows the analytical and numerical results for the dimensionless travel distance Lp = Lp /Rp
for stable values of surface tension G > 1. The contact between the droplet interface and the pipette
wall is handled by the penalty method and by taking advantage of the level-set function that is locally
reconstructed at each iteration. Knowing the level-set function instantaneously yields the closest
distance from any point on the pipette wall to the droplet interface, which considerably simplifies the
contact problem. The computational domain was discretized using elements of size h = R/10 with
R the radius of the droplet in its initial spherical shape. The CFL condition on the time step is less
strict here since the interface force here only depends on the mean curvature which is a second order
term (as opposed to fourth order terms for an elastic interface). The time step was therefore chosen
as ∆t = (h/R)2 . The numerical and analytical solutions for the travel distance Lp show a very good
agreement and predict the same critical surface tension below which the droplet cannot find a stable
equilibrium and is entirely aspired.

1.3.4

Elastic capsule through a tight opening

Figure 1.21: The surface Jacobian J of the vesicle is shown as a color gradient along the interface, along
with the surrounding fluid pressure field and streamlines. The time step used was ∆t = (h/R) × 1e−4
and the tolerances T OLv = T OLp = T OLv̄k = 1e−5
This example shows an elastic vesicle forced through a small opening by a pressure gradient ∆p, and
illustrates the very large deformations the vesicle can go through using the presented method, both
in terms of the stretching and bending of the interface. The surface Jacobian (or dilation) of the
vesicle is shown as a color gradient along the interface in Fig.1.21, along with the surrounding fluid
pressure field and streamlines. A slip boundary condition was applied on the walls of the opening and
a double pressure and velocity enrichment was implemented in the elements cut by both the walls
40

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

and the interface. The computational domain was discretized using elements of size h = R/10 with R
the radius of the vesicle in its initial circular shape, and the time step was chosen as ∆t = (h/R)−4 .
One can observe the wide range of values taken by the surface Jacobian (> 2.5 and as low as 0.2)
as the vesicle goes through the opening. Simulating such deformations with a Lagrangian description
of the interface would require the use of complicated remeshing algorithms at several points during
the simulation to prevent large mesh distortion. The advantages of using a Eulerian point of view in
combination with the grid based particle tracking of the interface become clear here as it ensures a
homogeneous spatial discretization of the interface throughout the simulation.

1.4

Conclusion

In this chapter, we presented a full Eulerian formulation for the analysis of the large deformations
of an immersed interface arising in a large number of soft matter mechanics problems. The model is
versatile enough to accommodate various material behaviors from a hyperelastic membrane to a fluid
interface. The introduction of a tangential velocity degree of freedom for the interface in combination
with discontinuities in velocity and pressure fields enables us to simulate a wide variety of boundary
conditions between the interface and the surrounding fluid while automatically satisfying the normal
velocity continuity condition. These contributions were made numerically possible by coupling two
very efficient methods: the extended finite element and the grid-based particle methods, which used
in an Eulerian framework completely circumvents the problem of mesh distortion usually associated
with Lagrangian finite elements. The combination of these methods has two key advantages: (a)
the X-FEM makes it possible to account for field discontinuities within the finite element framework
and (b) the grid based particle method removes the need for time consuming reinitialization that are
usually associated with the use of of level-set in X-FEM. Furthermore, as opposed to the traditional
level-set method, the grid based particle method is very well suited to the computation of higher order
derivative on a curved surface and can accurately track the Lagrangian fields associated with an elastic
interface. We showed, via a number of examples, that the approach gives very satisfactory results for
a wide variety of problems involving the effect slip lengths, membrane elasticity, and characterized
by very large shape changes. In this context, future research can describe various mechanisms that
may include the phoretic transport of highly deformable cells [3], the diffusion of membrane associated
molecules on curved manifolds and its coupling with mechanical deformation [153, 65], or the effect
of slip length on vesicles tumbling under the effect of shear flow [152].
41

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Appendix: components of the tangent matrix

To obtain the dicretized weak form of the governing equations, let us turn to the weak form (1.25)
and decompose the integration over Ω ∪ Γ into the sum of the integration over the element domain Ωe :
nel Z
X
e=1

Z

e

wv ·

(µ∇wv : ∇v − p∇wv : I) dV +

µ

Γe

Ωe

Z

Z

e

wp ∇ · vdV +

+
e
ZΩ

+
Γe

e

k


µ −
λ
+
+
f̄
dse
l−

Z

λp ([p] + f¯⊥ )dse

wp λp ds +
Γe

Γe

wv̄

l

λ+ −
+

µ


µ +
+
k+
k−
k
(λ
(λ
dse
+
[v]
)
+
+
[v]
)
+
f̄
l+
l−
Z


µ
+
wλ+ (µ∇v · n̄)k+ − + [v]k+ dse
l
e

Z Γ

µ k−  e
k−
+
wλ− (µ∇v · n̄) − − [v]
ds
= 0
l
Γe

(1.57)

Next, we replace the different fields v, p, v̄ k , λp , λ+ and λ− with their discretized form (1.22), (1.23)
and (1.24). In order to minimize the length of the discretized governing equations, we first rewrite
the interpolation equations as the product of a shape function matrix and the element nodal values
vector as follows. Equation (1.23) can be rewritten as
ṽe (x, t) = N9 (x) · ve (t)
"
N19 0
N99 0
9
...
with N (x) =
0 N99
0 N19
(H − H1 )N19 a11

0

(H − H1 )N19 a12

	T
and ve (t) = v11 v21 v12 v22 ... v19 v29 , v̂ 1 ...v̂ 9 ,
0

...

(H − H9 )N99 a91

0

0

(H − H9 )N99 a92

while (1.22) takes the form:
p̃e (x, t) = N4 (x) · pe (t)


with N4 (x) = N14 ...N44 (H − H1 )N14 ...(H − H4 )N44

	T
and pe (t) = p1 ...p4 p̂1 ...p̂4 ,
and (1.24) reads:
v̄˜k e (x, t) = N̄(x) · v̄k e (t) , λ̃ep (x, t) = N̄(x) · λep (t) and λ̃± e (x, t) = N̄(x) · λ± e (t)


with N̄ = N̄1 N̄2
n
oT

	T

	T
and v̄k e (t) = v̄ k 1 v̄ k 2
, λep (t) = λ1p λ2p
, λ± e (t) = λ± 1 λ± 2
42

#

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

We further write the rate of deformation of the fluid De (in Voigt notation) and the velocity divergence
∇.ve in element e in the two-dimensional plane strain case as:




e
D11



e
e
e
e
{De } =  D22
 = B · v and ∇ · v = B̌ · v
e
2D12
where the B and B̌ matrices relates the nodal velocities to the deformation rate and velocity divergence:
∂NI9 (x)
∂x1



B = [B1 B2 ... Bn9 +m9 ] with BI = 


0
∂NI9 (x)
∂x2

0
∂NI9 (x)
∂x2
∂NI9 (x)
∂x1






and


B̌ = B̌1 B̌2 ... B̌n9 +m9





with B̌I =

∂NI9 (x) ∂NI9 (x)
∂x1
∂x2



with these definition, one can rewrite the weak form in its discretized form as follows:
nel
X

{wve }T

e=1

Z

T

e

4

B · µB · v − N · p

e



Z

e

(N9 )T · a1

dV +

Ωe


µ
e−
N̄
·
λ
dse
l−

Z
+
(N9 )T · f̄ dse

µ
l

Γe

N̄ · λe+ −
+

(1.58)

Γe

+

nel
X

{wpe }T

Z

4 T

e

e

Z

(N ) · B̌ · v dV +
Ωe

e=1

Z
nel
X
e T
+
{wv̄k }

Γe

(N4[] )T

· N̄ ·

λep dse






µ 9
e
e+
ke
−
N
·
a
·
v
dse
N̄
·
λ
+
v̄
1
+
l+
l+
Γ
e
e=1

Z
Z
µ



µ 9
T
e−
ke
e
e
T
k e
N̄ · − N̄ · −λ − v̄
+ − N− · a1 · v ds +
N̄ · f̄ ds
l
l
Γe
Γe
Z

Z
nel
X
e T
T
4
e e
T
⊥ e
N̄ · N[] · p ds +
N̄ · f̄ ds
+
{wλp }
N̄T ·

µ

Γe

e=1
nel
X

Z

Γe



µ 
ke
9
e
e
+
N̄ ·
· P · B+ · v − + N̄ · v̄ − N+ · a1 · v
ds
l
Γe
e=1
Z

nel


X
µ 
e
T
ke
9
e
e
T
T
⊥
e
ds
= 0
+
{wλ− }
N̄ · µa1 · P · B− · v + − N̄ · v̄ − N− · a1 · v
l
Γe
{wλe + }T

T



⊥

µaT1

e

e=1

where the subscript + and − on the B and N9 indicates whether the fluid velocity (and its derivative)


is interpolated on the + or − side of Γ while N4[] = 0..0 N14 ...N44 is used to interpolate the pressure
jump across the interface. The above equation can then conveniently be written in the following
format:
"

Kt

It2

It1

K̄t

# "
·

d(t)
d̄(t)

43

#

"
+

Ft
F̄t

#
= 0

CHAPTER 1. PARTICLE-BASED MOVING INTERFACE METHOD FOR THE STUDY OF IMMERSED
THIN MEMBRANES

Where the matrices The various component of the element matrix Ke in are calculated as:
Kevv =

Z

Kevp

Z
=

Kevλ+

=

Kevλ−

=

=

Kv̄k v =
Kev̄k v̄k

=

Kev̄k λ+

=

Kev̄k λ−

=

Keλp p =
Keλ+ v =
Keλ+ v̄k

=

Keλ− v =
Keλ− v̄k

−BT · N4 dV e

e
ZΩ

Kepv =
Kepλp

µBT · B dV e

Ωe

=

µ
(N9− )T · a1 · N̄ dse
+
e l
Γ
Z
µ
− − (N9− )T · a1 · N̄ dse
l
e
ZΓ
(N4 )T · B̌dV e
e
ZΩ
(N4[] )T · N̄dse
e
ZΓ

µ
µ
N̄T · a1 · − · N9− − + · N9+ dse
l
l
e
ZΓ
µ

µ
N̄T · + − − · N̄dse
l
l
e
ZΓ
µ T
N̄ · N̄dse
+
e l
Γ
Z
µ
− − N̄T · N̄dse
l
e
ZΓ
N̄T · N4[] dse
e
ZΓ


N̄T · µaT1 · P⊥ · B+ + N9+ · a1 dse
e
ZΓ
µ
− + N̄T · N̄dse
l
e
ZΓ


N̄T · µaT1 · P⊥ · B− − N9− · a1 dse
e
ZΓ
µ T
N̄ · N̄dse
−
Γe l

while the external forces associated with element e are written:
Z
Fev =
−(N9 )T · f̄ dV e
e
ZΩ
e
Fv̄k =
N̄T · f̄ k dse
e
ZΓ
Feλp =
N̄T · f̄ ⊥ dse
Γe

where f̄ is computed using the updated strain and curvature.

44

Chapter 2

An X-FEM based
numerical-asymptotic expansion for
simulating a Stokes flow near a sharp
corner
A large number of the flows considered in Fluid-structure interaction problems include their interactions with structures with sharp corners or tips. Examples of these problems include the flow inside
a channel with sudden changes of radius [1, 11, 142, 63, 119], the flow through cracks and interfaces
[168] or the filtration of particles through a porous membrane [181, 86, 82]. The presence of local curvature singularities where the fluid interacts with the structure results in the appearance of pressure
or velocity singularities, as described by Moffat in [118]. These singularities at the small scale are
often associated with flow separation or stagnation regions at the larger scale that are of great importance in many engineering applications, and to describe them accurately still remains a significant
computational challenge.
Traditionally in this type of fluid/interaction problem, the geometry of sharp corner and the singular fields around them are resolved through the use of local refinement of the spatial discretization
[1, 11, 142, 63, 119]. However, these types of algorithms are computationally costly and can never
truly resolve the local field discontinuities. Indeed, the standard finite element method uses a linear or
quadratic continuous space that ultimately fails to describe the hyperbolic pressure field that appears
at the corner tips [118].
To address that issue, Hawa and Rusak [77] developed an asymptotic/numerical matching method
to simulate a viscous flow through a suddenly expanding channel. In this work, the inner analytical
solution around the corner is matched with the outer numerical solution computed with the finite
difference method. They successfully simulated the singularities near the corner for various Reynolds
number and channel expansion ratios. However, their numerical method still requires some level of
mesh refinement around the corner and the spatial discretization of the corner is mesh dependent,
which limits the method to the study of right angle corners.
45

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

Another numerical/asymptotic matching method is the extended finite element method, which was
originally developed by Moës et al in the framework of the Extended Finite Element method (XFEM) to compute the discontinuous displacement and singular stress field around cracks inside an
elastic body [117]. The idea was to locally enrich the traditional C 0 finite element space around the
crack tips with the asymptotic solution for the displacement and stress fields. This enriched space
allowed the finite element method to describe the singular fields around the crack tip without the
need for refinement or remeshing [117, 76, 137, 28]. The method has also successfully been applied to
the simulation of the Stokes flow around rigid particles, where the asymptotic solution for the pressure and velocity field around a cylinder are used to enrich the finite elements cut by the particle [172].
Recognizing the similarities between the pressure field of the flow around a corner and the stress
field around a crack tip, we here follow the same approach as taken by Moës et al in [117] and
present a collocation method in the framework of the X-FEM to simulate the Stokes flow around
structures with sharp corners. We enrich the finite element space around corner tips with the first
order symmetric and anti-symmetric modes of the asymptotic solution for a Stokes flow near a sharp
corner, following Moffatt’s solution [118]. These special enrichment functions provide the finite element method with the flexibility needed to accurately describe the singular pressure and velocity field
around sharp corners. The no-slip boundary condition on the walls of the corner is enforced via the
use of Lagrange multipliers. The proposed approach has the following three contributions:
• The local field singularities near sharp corners are resolved without the need for computationally
expensive mesh refinement.
• The enrichment functions are calculated for any convex sharp corners .
• The technique presented holds for any simultaneous combinations of sharp corners, and can
handle the simulation of a Stokes flow with complex boundary condition without any refinement
and on a fixed structured mesh.

We show that the formulation is well adapted for investigating problems where physics at the small
scale have a large impact on the overall large scale behavior. The outline of the chapter is as follows:
Section 2 presents the governing equations and the asymptotic solution for the Stokes flow near a sharp
corner. Section 3 follows with the extended finite element discretization scheme and the derivation
of the weak form. The special enrichment functions used in the numerical discrezation are derived
from the asymptotic solution in section 4. We then verify in section 5 the accuracy of the method
by calculating the error made when computing the flow velocity around corners of different angle,
with and without special enrichment. The present method is also compared with the X-FEM without
corner enrichment but with different levels mesh refinement for the problem of a Stokes flow through
a suddenly expanding channel. Finally, the method is applied to the estimation of the permeability
of a network of fibers, where it is shown that neglecting the pressure and velocity singularities around
the fiber tips leads to a significant underestimation of the overall network permeability.
46

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

2.1
2.1.1

Governing equations
Basic equations

Consider a two-dimensional incompressible viscous flow in a domain Ω, in which exists one or multiple
no-slip rigid boundaries Γ taking the shape of thin plates or sharp corners (Fig.3.1). The problem
is characterized by the Reynolds number Re = HU ρ/µ where H is the characteristic length scale,
U the characteristic fluid velocity, µ the kinematic viscosity and ρ the fluid density. We choose here
to remain in the Stokes flow assumption with Re  1, where inertial effect may be neglected. The
velocity of a fluid particle is given in terms of its material time derivative v(x) = Dx/Dt, where
x = {x y} is the current position of the fluid particle at time t. In these conditions, the governing
equations with the associated boundary conditions for the Stokes flow at the steady state are written:

µ∇2 v − ∇p = ρf ∀x ∈ Ω 

∇·v
= 0 ∀x ∈ Ω


with v(x) = 0 ∀x ∈ Γ.

(2.1)

where p is the fluid pressure and f a body force. These equations govern the fluid flow in the domain
Ω and can generally be easily solved using the finite element method, as long as the geometry of the
boundary Γ does not include any curvature singularities, such as a sharp corner. However, when such
a sharp corner occur in the geometry of Γ, equations (2.1) admit a singular solution near the tip of
the corner, which cannot be resolved with the classical finite element method. First, let us turn to
the asymptotic solutions for the fluid velocity and pressure near the corner tip, as they will be needed
when deriving the corresponding enrichment functions.

2.1.2

Asymptotic solution for the flow near a sharp corner

For simplicity, we adopt a polar coordinate system (r, θ) centred on the corner, where r =

p
x02 + y 02 ,

θ = arctan (y 0 /x0 ) and the axis x0 and y 0 are aligned with the corner’s bisector (see Fig.3.1). The corner
is defined by the angle α made with its bisector, where α = π/2 and α = π respectively correspond to
a flat wall and a semi infinite plate.

Figure 2.1: (a) fluid domain Ω and fixed structure Γ with no-slip/no-penetration boundary condidtion.
(b) local polar coordinate system centred at the corner.
47

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

The asymptotic solution of the viscous flow near a sharp corner follows the paper of Moffat [118].
The streamline function ψ(r, θ) solution to the Stokes equation ∇ψ = 0 in the region 0 < r  H can
be written in the following separated form:
ψ(r, θ) = rγ fγ (θ)

(2.2)

where γ is an unknown complex exponent that determines the structure of the flow, and is to be found
as part of the solution, as described in section 2.1.3. According to [118], the function fγ (θ) takes the
general form:
fγ (θ) = A cos (γθ) + B sin (γθ) + C cos ((γ − 2)θ) + D sin ((γ − 2)θ)

(2.3)

where A, B, C and D are arbitrary complex constants. In the cases where γ = 0, 1 or 2, the above
equation degenerates into other forms that are not relevant to the problem studied here, and we will
henceforth only consider values of γ such that γ 6= 0, 1, 2. The axial and radial velocities of the flow
are deduced from the stream function ψ(r, θ) as follows:
vr =

1 ∂ψ
r ∂θ

and

vθ = −

∂ψ
,
∂r

(2.4)

and are subjected to the following no-splip/no-penetration boundary conditions at the wall:
vr (r, θ = α) = 0,

vθ (r, θ = α) = 0

vr (r, θ = −α) = 0, vθ (r, θ = −α) = 0.

(2.5)
(2.6)

In general, any Stokes flow near a corner can be calculated as the linear superposition of an antisymmetrical (mode I) and symmetrical (mode II) solution with respect to the corner’s bisector x0 (see
Fig.2.2). We now briefly present these two cases.

Figure 2.2: Asymptotic solution: pressure and stream lines for a viscous flow near a sharp corner
α = 0.8π for (a) mode I and (b) mode II. The pressure field is singular at r = 0.

48

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

2.1.3

Mode I: anti-symmetrical case

In the anti-symmetrical case, which we will refer to as mode I, the flow is even so the constants B and
D in (3.11) vanish, and fγ (θ) reads:
fγ (θ) = A cos (γθ) + C cos ((γ − 2)θ).

(2.7)

Enforcing the boundary condition at the wall requires that fγ (±α) = ∂fγ (±α)/∂θ = 0, and yields a
system of two equations for A and C:
(

A cos (γθ) + C cos ((γ − 2)θ)

= 0

Aγ sin (γθ) + C(γ − 2) sin ((γ − 2)θ) = 0

,

(2.8)

which admits non trivial solutions only if γ satisfies the following simple algebraic equation [118]:
sin ((γ − 1)2α) = (1 − γ) sin (2α).

(2.9)

Combining (3.10), (2.7) and (2.8), one finds that the stream function in the anti-symmetrical case is
written:
ψ(r, θ) = rγ (cos (γθ) cos ((γ − 2)α) − cos (γα) cos ((γ − 2)θ)) .

(2.10)

The resulting stream lines and pressure field for α = 0.8π in mode I are shown in Fig.2.2a, where the
pressure is calculated by solving the momentum equation
∇p = µ∇2 v

(2.11)

where v = vr er + vθ eθ is computed using equations (3.10) and (3.12).

Figure 2.3: Asymptotic solution: pressure and stream lines forming eddies for a viscous flow near a
sharp corner α = 0.3π for (a) mode I and (b) mode II. The pressure and velocity fields vanish at r = 0
and show no singularity.
When the angle α made by the two walls of the corner is less than a critical angle α < 0.405π (or
α < 73◦ ), equation (2.9) admits complex solutions [118]. To calculate the stream function ψ(r, θ) in
49

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

this case, we first decompose the exponent into its real and complex components γ = γR + iγI and
rewrite (2.9) as the following system of equations [134]:
(

sin (2α(γR − 1)) cosh (2αγI )

= (1 − γR ) sin(2α)

cosh (2α(γR − 1)) sinh (2αγI ) =

(−γI ) sin(2α)

(2.12)

which can be solved for γR and γI using a Newton-Raphson non-linear solver, given a good initial
guess. Finally, using (3.10), (2.7) and (2.8), one can write the stream function ψ(r, θ) in the case
α < 0.405π as [134, 118]:
ψ(r, θ) = rγR [Real {Q} cos (γI ln r) − Imag {Q} sin (γI ln r)]

(2.13)

with Q = (cos (γθ) cos ((γ − 2)α) − cos (γα) cos ((γ − 2)θ)))
The resulting stream lines and pressure field are shown in Fig.2.3.a, where one notes the appearance
of an infinite number of self repeating eddies as r decreases to zero.

2.1.4

Mode II: symmetrical case

The derivation of the solution for the symmetrical flow, or mode II is extremely similar to mode I, and
we will therefore omit some details. In this case, fγ (θ) should be an odd function, and we therefore
set A and C to be zero in (3.11):
fγ (θ) = B sin (γθ) + D sin ((γ − 2)θ).

(2.14)

Enforcing the no-slip and no-penetration boundary conditions yields to following alebraic equation for
γ:
sin ((γ − 1)2α) = (γ − 1) sin (2α).

(2.15)

Combining (3.10), (2.14) and the boundary conditions one finds the stream function for mode 2 to
read:
ψ(r, θ) = rγ (sin (γθ) sin ((γ − 2)α) − sin (γα) sin ((γ − 2)θ)) .

(2.16)

Similarly to mode 1, for α < 0.405π, equation (2.15) admits complex solutions. Taking the same
approach as for mode 1, a decomposition of the exponent γ into its real and imaginary components
leads to the following form of the stream function:
ψ(r, θ) = rγR [Real {Q} cos (γI ln r) − Imag {Q} sin (γI ln r)]

(2.17)

with Q = (sin (γθ) sin ((γ − 2)α) − sin (γα) sin ((γ − 2)θ))).
The resulting stream lines and pressure field are shown in Fig.2.3.b where similarly to mode I, one
notes the apparition of an infinite number of self repeating eddies as r decreases to zero. Let us
now turn to the numerical formulation and use the asymptotic solution presented above to derive the
corresponding enrichment functions.
50

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

2.2

Extended finite element formulation

The idea of the Extended Finite Element Method is to enrich a finite element space with additional
functions. Our numerical technique takes the same approach: the Stokes flow is solved using the
traditional C0 conforming finite elements (in our cases 4 nodes bilinear elements for the pressure and
9 nodes quadratic elements for the velocity) space, and we enrich this space with additional degrees of
freedom that allow the pressure jump across an interface (the velocity stays continuous) and singular
pressure/velocity fields around the corner tip. The velocity and pressure fields in this enriched space
are interpolated as follows:
p(x) =

X

Ni (x)pi +

i

v(x) =

X
i

X

Nj (x)(H(x) − Hj )p̌j +

j

N̂i (x)vi +

k

XX
k

XX

Nk (Gl (r(x), θ(x)) − Gk )p̃k

(2.18)

l

N̂k (F l (r(x), θ(x)) − Fk )ṽk

(2.19)

l

where N and N̂ are the regular 4 nodes and 9 nodes shape functions, H is the Heaviside function that
provides the needed discontinuity, and F = {FI , FII } and G = {GI , GII } are the special asymptotic
corner tip functions for modes I and II. They are derived in section 4 from the asymptotic solution
presented in section 2.2 . The term p̌j corresponds to the enriched degrees of freedom associated with
the jump in pressure across an interface while the terms p̃k and ṽk are the enrichment degrees of
freedom associated with the near corner tip pressure and velocity fields.

Figure 2.4: Node selection for the slip and tip enrichment of a (a) corner and (b) plate. The black
dots denote tip enrichment for the velocity and pressure (only the four corner nodes in the case of the
pressure) while the squares indicate split enrichment for the pressure.
Fig.2.4a and b illustrate the enrichment strategy used to model the flow around sharp corners and
tips. The full circles denote the node enriched with corner/tip functions and belong to the element that
contains the corner/tip. The empty squares represent the nodes enriched with a Heaviside function
and belong the elements fully cuts by the corner walls.
In addition to the velocity and pressure degrees of freedom and their respective enrichment, let us
introduce the Lagrange multipliers λI . These are used to enforce the no-slip/no-penetration boundary
condition (2.1) on the corner walls and tip and are discretized at the intersection between the corner
walls and the underlying mesh, as shown in Fig.2.5. They are interpolated along the interface Γ using
P
one-dimensional shape functions λi (x) = 2I=1 N̄ I (x)λIi where I denotes the numbering of the nodes
for each segment of the corner walls, and i runs over the dimensions 1 and 2 (in 2D).
51

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

Figure 2.5: Discretization of the Lagrange multipliers in (a) simple cut element, (b) double cut element,
(c) corner tip element and (d) tip element.)

2.2.1

Weak formulation

Introducing the test functions wv and wp , integrating by parts and using the divergence theorem, the
weak form of the governing equations (2.1) in the fluid domain can be written as:
(∇wv , µ∇v)Ω − (∇wv , pI)Ω + (wv , ρf )Ω = 0
(wp , ∇ · v)Ω = 0

(2.20)

where the notation (·, ·)Ω indicates the L2 inner product with respect to the domain Ω. We also need
to enforce the no-slip/no-penetration boundary conditions given in (2.1) on the corner walls. This is
done by using the Lagrange multipliers λ. The corresponding variational form is then given by: find
v ∈ V, p ∈ P and λ ∈ L such that for all wv ∈ V, wp ∈ P and wλ ∈ L
(∇wv , µ∇v)Ω − (∇wv , pI)Ω + (wv , ρf )Ω + (wv , λ)Γ = 0
(wp , ∇ · v)Ω = 0
(wλ , v)Γ = 0

(2.21)

where wλ are the test functions associated with the Lagrange multipliers and V, P and L are admissible
spaces for the velocity, pressure and Lagrange multipliers.

2.2.2

Discretized form

The discretized form of the equilibrium can be written from the weak form (5.18) by using the XFEM
approximation as follows:
Kd = f

(2.22)

where K is the consistent tangent matrix, d = {v p λ} the global vector of unknowns and f the
force vector. The element contribution to K and f are as follows:


kevv kevp kevλ


ke =  kepv
0
0
e
kλv 0
0
n
oT
fe =
fve 0 0
52





(2.23)

(2.24)

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

with

Z
kvv =
kevp =

e
ZΩ

µBT · B dΩ

(2.25a)

−BT · N̂ dΩ

(2.25b)

NT · N̄dΓ

(2.25c)

N̂T · B dΩ

(2.25d)

N̄T · NdΓ

(2.25e)

Ωe

kevλ =

Z

kepv

Z

Γe

=
Ωe

keλv =

Z
Γe

and
fve

Z

NT · ρf dΩ.

=

(2.26)

Ωe

The shape function matrices N, N̂, N̄ and B take the following form:
i
h
N = N1 , ..., N9 , Ñ1 , ..., Ñ9
i
h
ˇ
ˇ ˜
˜
N̂ = N̂ 1 , ..., N̂ 4 , N̂ 1 , ..., N̂ 4 , N̂ 1 , ..., N̂ 4


N̄ = N̄ 1 N̄ 2
i
h
B = B1 , ..., B9 , B̃1 , ..., B̃9

(2.27a)
(2.27b)
(2.27c)
(2.27d)

with
"
Ni =

Ni

0

0

Ni

#

"
, Ñi =

"
(F − F 1 )

Ni

0

0

Ni

#

"
, ..., (F − F 8 )

Ni

0

0

Ni

##

i
h
ˇ
˜
N̂ i = (H − H i )N̂ i , N̂ i = (G − G1 )N̂ i , ..., (G − G4 )N̂ i


N,1i
0


 0 N,2i 
i

B =

 Ni
 ,2 0 
0 N,1i



(F − F 8 )N i ),1
0
(F − F 1 )N i ),1
0



1
i




0
(F − F )N ),2 
0
(F − F 8 )N i ),2


,
...,
B̃i = 

 (F − F 8 )N i )
 (F − F 1 )N i )
0
0
,2
,2



1
i
0
(F − F 8 )N i ),1
0
(F − F )N ),1

(2.28a)
(2.28b)

(2.28c)




 .



(2.28d)

where F i and Gi are the asymptotic functions used to enriched the standard finite element space
around the corner tips. They are derived in the next section.
Remark: The computation of these quantities involves the assessment of integrals over elements
that can be numerically evaluated using Gaussian quadrature with four integration points in regular
elements. However, for the elements cut by the corners, the integration is performed by splitting the
53

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

element into sub-triangles using a Delaunay triangulation on the four corner points, the point at the
corner tip, and the two intersection points between the corner walls and the element edges. A fourth
order Gauss integration is then carried out in each triangle, as described in [117].

2.3

Enrichment functions

Here we aim at identifying the asymptotic corner tip functions F and G that can span all the solutions
for the velocity and pressure fields of a flow near a sharp corner. Similar to the asymptotic solutions
presented in section 2.1.2, we proceed by considering mode I and mode II separately.

2.3.1

Mode I: asymptotic enrichment for the anti-symmetrical case

Recalling equation (2.10) for the stream function in mode I, one can use (3.12) to compute the axial
and radial velocities as follows:
1 ∂ψ
= rγ−1 ((γ − 2) cos(γα) sin(θ(γ − 2)) − γ cos(α(γ − 2)) sin(θγ))
r ∂θ

∂ψ
vθ (r, θ) = −
= γ −rγ−1 (cos(α(γ − 2)) cos(θγ) − cos(γα) cos(θ(γ − 2))).
∂r
vr (r, θ) =

(2.29)
(2.30)

Next, we write the flow velocity in the local Cartesian coordinate system {x0 , y 0 }:
vx0 = vr cos θ − vθ sin θ = γ sin(θ)rγ−1 (cos(α(γ − 2)) cos(θγ) − cos(γα) cos(θ(γ − 2)))
+ cos(θ)rγ−1 ((γ − 2) cos(γα) sin(θ(γ − 2)) − γ cos(α(γ − 2)) sin(θγ))
(2.31)
vy0 = vr sin θ + vθ cos θ = sin(θ)rγ−1 ((γ − 2) cos(γα) sin(θ(γ − 2)) − γ cos(α(γ − 2)) sin(θγ))
− γ cos(θ)rγ−1 (cos(α(γ − 2)) cos(θγ) − cos(γα) cos(θ(γ − 2)))

(2.32)

Finally, we write the functions FI as the basis of functions that can span all the solutions vx0 and vy0
in mode I. After some calculation, and making use of trigonometry identities, the basis of function FI
for mode I is found to be:
FI

=

rγ−1 sin ((γ − 2)θ) sin θ, rγ−1 cos ((γ − 2)θ) cos θ,
	
rγ−1 sin ((γ − 2)θ) cos θ, rγ−1 cos ((γ − 2)θ) sin θ



(2.33)

where γ is found using a non-linear solver on (2.9), given α and a good initial guess. The basis
functions GI for the pressure are derived in a similar manner. Given the stream function (2.10) and
the momentum equation (3.15), the pressure field around the corner tip for mode I is found to be:
1
rγ−2 γ 2 ((γ − 2) cos(γα) sin(θ(γ − 2)) − γ sin(γθ) cos(α(γ − 2)))
(γ − 2)Re

γ 3 sin(γθ) cos(α(γ − 2)) + (γ − 2)3 (− cos(γα)) sin(θ(γ − 2)) + p∞
(2.34)

p(r, θ) = −
+

where p∞ is the pressure away from the corner tip when r → ∞. An important feature of equation
(2.34) is the fact that for α < π/2, the pressure shows no singular behavior at r = 0. Indeed, for
α < 0.405π, equation (2.9) yields γ > 2, and the term rγ−2 in (2.34) becomes zero at r = 0. In
that case, the corner always become a stagnation point where the pressure and velocity are identically
54

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

zero. In this work, we choose to focus on the cases where the pressure shows a singular behavior and
therefore only use enrichment functions for α > 0.405π. The basis functions for the pressure in mode
I are therefore written:
GI

=



	
rγ−2 sin (γθ), rγ−2 sin ((γ − 2)θ)

(2.35)

Remark: Alternatively to solving (2.9) a priori, the parameter γ in the enrichment functions above
can also be found via an adaptive method for parametric X-FEM [173]. This method considers the
residual error based on the strong form to drive the algorithm and determine the parameter of the
enrichment function. .

2.3.2

Mode II: asymptotic enrichment for the symmetrical case

Finding the corner tip asymptotic function for mode II is very similar to mode I. The basis of functions
FII that can span all the solutions vx0 and vy0 in mode II is found to be same as for mode I, only the
value of the exponent γ changes:
FII

=

rγ−1 sin ((γ − 2)θ) sin θ, rγ−1 cos ((γ − 2)θ) cos θ,
	
rγ−1 sin ((γ − 2)θ) cos θ, rγ−1 cos ((γ − 2)θ) sin θ



(2.36)

Next, the pressure field around the corner tip for mode II is found to be:
1
rγ−2 γ 2 ((γ − 2) sin(γα) cos(θ(γ − 2)) − γ cos(γθ) sin(α(γ − 2)))
(γ − 2)Re

γ 3 cos(γθ) sin(α(γ − 2)) + (γ − 2)3 (− sin(γα)) cos(θ(γ − 2)) + p∞
(2.37)

p(r, θ) = −
+

The basis functions for the pressure in mode II is therefore written:
GII

=



	
rγ−2 cos (γθ), rγ−2 cos ((γ − 2)θ)

(2.38)

Table 1 shows a summary of the asymptotic functions used as enrichment for both pressure and
velocity fields for both modes, which constitutes the main result of the present work.

GI
Mode I

FI
GII

Mode II

FII

 γ−2
	
r
sin (γθ), rγ−2 sin ((γ − 2)θ)
 γ−1
r
sin ((γ − 2)θ) sin θ, rγ−1 cos ((γ − 2)θ) cos θ ,
	
rγ−1 sin ((γ − 2)θ) cos θ, rγ−1 cos ((γ − 2)θ) sin θ
 γ−2
	
r
cos (γθ), rγ−2 cos ((γ − 2)θ)
 γ−1
r
sin ((γ − 2)θ) sin θ, rγ−1 cos ((γ − 2)θ) cos θ ,
	
rγ−1 sin ((γ − 2)θ) cos θ, rγ−1 cos ((γ − 2)θ) sin θ

Table 2.1: Corner tip asymptotic functions
55

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

2.4

Results

In this section, the numerical scheme presented above is used to solve for fluid flows with different
boundary conditions and the results are compared with both the analytical solution and the X-FEM
without special enrichment. It is then applied to estimate the permeability of a two-dimensional
fibrous network.

2.4.1

Flow around a corner

Here we investigate the accuracy of the numerical technique by comparing it with the analytical
solution developed by Moffat [118]. The velocity given by the analytical solution is imposed at the
boundary of the computational domain while a no-slip/no-penetration condition is enforced along the
wall of the corner (Fig. 2.7). The Reynolds number is given by [118]:
Re =

U rReal[γ]
ν

(2.39)

with ν the kinematic viscosity and U the fluid velocity away from the corner. The inertial effect can

Figure 2.6: Flow around a corner of angle α.The velocity given by the analytical solution is imposed at
the boundary of the computational domain while a no-slip/no-penetration condition is enforced along
the wall of the corner (shown in red).
therefore be neglected sufficiently close to the corner since for the cases investigated here, Real[γ] > 0.
The parameters U and ν are chosen such that Re  1 everywhere in the computational domain. The
error made in computing the velocity of the flow near a corner is calculated as follows:
Z

L/2 Z π

Ev =
0

−π

||vnum (r, θ) − vasymp (r, θ)||
drdθ,
||vasymp (r, θ)||

(2.40)

where vnum denotes the velocity calculated using the numerical method, vasymp the asymptotic solution and L the length of the computational domain.
Fig.3.4 shows the error for different corner angle α, with or without special enrichment. We observe
that without enrichment, the error varies between 10% up to 27%, and decreases as the corner angle
increases. However, the incorporation of the corner tip enrichment developed above reduces the error
for all corner angles, by up to a factor of 8 and always stays under 5%. Fig.2.8 shows the streamlines for
the flow around the different corners. One notes that without corner tip enrichment, the streamlines
56

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

Figure 2.7: Error Ev made in computing the flow velocity around the corner tip in mode I and II,
for different corner angle α. The error can be divided by up to a factor of 8 by using corner tip
enrichment.
intersect the corner wall, which denotes a poor enforcement of the no-penetration boundary condition.
The effect of incorporating the corner tip enrichment can also be clearly seen on the pressure field
inside elements containing the corner tip, in Fig.??: with enrichment (Fig.??e-h), the pressure field is
singular around the corner tip and matches the behavior shown in the asymptotic solution (Fig.2.2)
, whereas without corner enrichment (Fig.??a-d), the pressure field only varies linearly inside the
element and does not show any pressure concentration around the corner tip.

Figure 2.8: Streamlines with and without enrichment for (a) α = π, (b) α = 0.87π,(c) α = 0.75π and
(c) α = 0.47π.

57

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

Figure 2.9: Streamlines and pressure fields for α = π, α = 0.87π, α = 0.75π and α = 0.47π. Left
column (a)-(d), without enrichment and right column (e)-(h) with enrichment.

2.4.2

Channel with a sudden expansion

In this section the proposed numerical method is applied to a simulation of a viscous flow through a
symmetric two dimensional long channel of height h which suddenly expands into a long channel of
height H. The flow through the channel is described in a Cartesian coordinate {x, y} system where x
runs along the length of the channel and y along the height of the channel . The sudden expansion
forms a sharp right angle located at x = 0, and the centerline of the channel corresponds to y = 0
58

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

Figure 2.10: Two-dimensional channel with sudden symmetrical expansion. The expansion is characterized by the ratio h/H)
(Fig.2.10). A steady Poiseuille flow is imposed at the channel inlet section located at x = x0 :
Uave
((h/2)2 − y 2 )
3h2 /16
= 0

vx =

(2.41)

vy

(2.42)

where Uave is the average flow velocity at the channel entry. The outlet section x = x1 is located far
enough from the corner to have a steady Poiseuille flow profile. The Reynolds number is given by
Re = Uave h/ν and Re is chosen such that Re  1 in order to stay within the Stokes flow assumptions.

Figure 2.11: Corner discretization for the two-dimensional channel with sudden symmetrical expansion. (a) 2 level refinement, (b) 3 level refinement, (c) 4 level refinement. (d) shows the 1 level
refinement discretization of the corner when using the enrichment functions.
The results for the flow in an expanding channel were obtained from the X-FEM without corner tip
enrichment but with several levels of mesh refinement, and compared to the results from the X-FEM
with corner tip enrichment. The different mesh sizes and the corresponding corner discretization are
shown in Fig.2.11. One can see that as mesh size decreases for the X-FEM without tip enrichment,
the resolution of the corner geometry improves but can never be fully resolved as being infinitely sharp
(Fig.2.11.a-c), whereas the use of tip enrichment allows a perfect geometrical discretization while using
a larger mesh size (Fig.2.11.d).
The streamline patterns for the flow in an expanding channel for Re  1 and h/H = 0.5 with and
without tip enrichment and for different mesh sizes are compared in Fig.2.13. It is found that at least
four levels of mesh refinement were necessary without tip enrichment, whereas the same results could
be obtained without mesh refinement using the tip enrichment numerical scheme. It is also important
to note that the results of the X-FEM without tip enrichment converge toward those from the present
numerical method as the mesh size decreases.
59

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

Figure 2.12: Pressure field and velocity streamlines for the two-dimensional channel with sudden symmetrical expansion. The expansion is characterized by the ratio h/H = 0.5.

Figure 2.13: Velocity streamlines for the two-dimensional channel with sudden symmetrical expansion,
using the X-FEM without tip enrichment with 4 different level of mesh refinement. The streamlines
are shown to converge towards those from using the present numerical technique.

2.4.3

Permeability of a fibrous network

In this example, we simulate a viscous flow through a fibrous network and estimate the equivalent
permeability. A possible application for this type of problem is filtration membranes, which are
present in many important processes in bio-medical engineering [9, 48], food or renewable fuel industry
[35]. The system modelled here represents a cross sectional area of a filtration membrane, where the
fibers constitute the membrane itself. For a low enough Reynolds number and pressure gradient
60

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

(or, equivalently, for an elastic modulus of the fibers high enough), the fibers can be considered as
rigid and fixed in place . A cross section of a fibrous network of size L × H is considered, with an
influx q = 1ms−1 prescribed at y = H/2 while a no-penetration boundary conditions are enforced at
x = −L/2 and x = L/2 (Fig.2.14). Since the flow considered here is two-dimensional, the fibers are
actually plates that extend infinitely in the out of plane direction.

Different densities of fibers with

Figure 2.14: Flow though a fibrous network. No-penetration boundary conditions are enforced at x = L
and x = −L while an influx of q = 1ms−1 is prescribed at y = H/2.)
random shapes and sharp tips are generated inside the computational domain. Recalling Darcy’s law
for a flow through a permeable medium, one can estimate the equivalent permeability of the network
as follows [41]:

keq = −

2Hµq
Pav (y = −H/2) − Pav (y = H/2)

(2.43)

where Pav (y = −H/2) and Pav (y = H/2) are the average pressure calculated at y = H/2 and
y = −H/2, and µ the fluid’s viscosity. Fig.2.15 shows the pressure field and streamline patterns
for the flow through networks with different fiber densities. It is important to note that the fibers
are generated independently from the underlying finite element mesh and can take any size, shape
and orientation, therefore making the generation of a network a straightforward process. Assuming
an average fiber length l0 , with the length of each fiber in the region [0.8l0 1.2l0 ], the network is
characterized by the following two parameter:
n
,
HL


3 cos2 (θ) − 1
=
,
2

d =
Sθ

(2.44)
(2.45)

where d is the fiber density computed as the number of fibers n in the area considered H × L,
and Sθ is the order parameter [148] of the fibers with respect to their preferred alignment direction
θ. The brackets h·i denotes the spacial averaging operation. For an isotropic distribution, Sθ =
0 while for perfectly aligned fibers, Sθ = 1. Assuming that the fibers do not intersect or touch,
the case d = 0 corresponds to a perfectly permeable material while d = ∞ denotes a perfectly
61

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

Figure 2.15: Pressure field and streamline patterns for a viscous flow through a network with fiber
density (a) d = 0.1, (b) d = 0.5, (c) d = 0.9 and (d) d = 1.7. Figures (e) and (f ) are a close up on the
pressure singularities around fiber tips. Figure (g) shows the equivalent permeability keq as a function
of fiber density with enrichment (continuous line with circles) and without enrichment (dashed line).
The relative difference ∆keq = (keq − keq w/o )/keq is shown in (h).

impermeable material. The equivalent network permeability keq is plotted as a function of fiber density
d for Sθ = 0 in Fig.2.15g, using the finite element method with (continuous lines) and without tip
enrichment (dashed line). As expected, one can observe that as the equivalent network permeability
decreases as the fiber density increases. However, it is important to note that without enrichment, the
equivalent network permeability is consistently underestimated. Indeed, the relative difference between
62

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

the two permeabilities ∆keq = (keq −keq w/o )/keq (where keq w/o is the permeability calculated without
enrichment) increases with the fiber density, reaching 27% for d = 4.2m−2 (Fig.2.15h), and is likely
to keep diverging as the density of fibers increases. This discrepancy illustrates the multiscale nature
of this problem. While the present method can compute the pressure gradient at the larger scale
H, it also accurately describes the small scale pressure singularities which have a large impact on
the overall permeability. This multiscale description of a viscous flow through a network of fibers is
achieved while keeping the discretization of the fibers completely mesh-independent, which ensures a
great robustness and efficiency of the method.
Finally, network anisotropy is considered and the effect of a preferred fiber orientation on the
equivalent network permeability is studied. Fig.2.16.a-c shows the pressure field and streamline patterns for the flow through an anisotropic network (Sθ = 1) with different orientation θ = 0, π/4 and
π/2. The equivalent network permeability is found to decrease with the orientation angle θ (Fig.2.16)
until it finds a minimum at θ = π/2 when the preferred orientation of the fibers is perpendicular to
the flow direction.

Figure 2.16: Equivalent permeability as a function of fiber orientation, with Sθ = 1. Pressure field and
streamline patterns are shown for (a) θ = 0, (b) θ = π/4 and (c) θ = π/2

63

CHAPTER 2. AN X-FEM BASED NUMERICAL-ASYMPTOTIC EXPANSION FOR SIMULATING A
STOKES FLOW NEAR A SHARP CORNER

2.5

Conclusion

A new computational technique based the Extended Finite Element method for describing the Stokes
flow around structures with any number of sharp corners/tips in combination with Lagrange multipliers
to enforce the no-slip boundary condition was developed. The enrichment functions for the pressure
and velocity fields are derived for any convex corner. The results compared with the analytical
solution for the flow around corners of various angle show a good accuracy of the method and a large
improvement over the standard finite element method. It is also found that results from the X-FEM
without tip enrichment for the flow through a suddenly expanding channel converge towards those of
the present numerical scheme as the level of mesh refinement increases. These results demonstrate
that enriching the finite element space with the asymptotic solution near the corner lead to converged
and accurate results for the problem of a viscous flow around sharp corners without the need for
complicated and time consuming mesh refinement algorithms.
The equivalent permeability keq of networks with various fiber densities and anisotropy is estimated using the X-FEM with and without the proposed tip enrichment strategy. It is found that the
local microscale pressure and velocity singularities around the fiber tips have a large impact on the
macroscale behavior of the network; neglecting them can lead to an underestimation of the permeability of as low as 30% for the finite element mesh size considered. The present numerical method
is therefore well adapted for situations where the flow at different scales play an important role, and
the mesh independent discretization of corners and walls make it ideal to compute the viscous flow
around multiple obstacles with sharp corners. The extension of the method in 3 dimensions is being
considered. Moffat’s solution and the present enrichment functions can easily be used in 3 dimensions
with minimum modification for the case of the flow around the edges of a plate. Possible complications
might occur in defining the correct Lagrange multiplier space to enforce the zero velocity condition
on the surface of the plate in 3 dimensions. Another difficulty resides in resolving the flow around
the corners of the plate in 3 dimensions, although there exist asymptotic solutions for the flow past a
quarter plate [84] which can be used to develop the corresponding enrichment functions.

64

Chapter 3

Applications of the Immersed
Membrane formulation to the study of
the interaction between soft colloid
particles and immersed fibrous network
Filtration membranes are ubiquitous to most biological systems and are at the heart of important
applications in bio-medical engineering [9, 48], food industry and both fossil and renewable fuels
processes [35]. In the majority of these applications, membranes are used to either (a) separate
undesired particles from a solution or (b) produce (and fractionate) stable emulsions with specific size
controls (such as liposomes) used in medical diagnosis and therapy [27]. In addition, a novel area
of biological medicine is drug delivery using liposomes [73, 2]. A liposome is a micron-sized vesicle
(bubble) whose interfacial surface is stabilized by lipids. The interior of the liposome can be filled
with drugs to be delivered for treatment of various diseases. Filtration of fluids containing liposomes
are required at various steps within their manufacture and delivery to patients, in order to provide
sterility. These filtration steps can require both allowing liposomes to freely pass through the porous
filter, while retaining possible biological contaminants, as well as, retaining and concentrating the
liposomes. Despite the very soft nature of these colloidal particles, current membrane designs have
consistently relied on the assumptions that they are rigid particles [60, 149, 81]. In fact, it has only
been in recent years that hindrance factors for transport of non-spheroidal (rod) shaped rigid particles
in ideal pores has been theoretically addressed [10, 44]. This has strongly hindered the performance
of current membrane systems. The incorporation of deformation is, however, expected to critically
affect the above mechanisms since particles can easily change their shape to accommodate a variety
of pore shapes and sizes (Fig. 1). It can also increase the adhesion between a particle and a surface
(by effectively increasing the contact surface area) and thus hinder particle entry and permeation.
From a computational modeling viewpoint, studies of the mechanics of soft vesicles and their interactions with an immersed porous network has been hindered by a number of theoretical challenges,
which include the coupled fluid-structure interactions, intense particle deformations and perhaps separation, as well as the effect of surface forces that are very significant at micron (and lower) length
scales. Furthermore, when fibers are present, the geometry of sharp tips create singular flow fields
65

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

which have been resolved through the use of refinement methods [1, 119]. Such approaches are not
only costly but can never truly resolve the steep gradient and hyperbolic pressure field that appears
at the fiber tips [118]. Regarding modeling immersed vesicles, one of the most acknowledged methods
is the Immersed Boundary Method [126], which basically relies on three features. First, the fluid
flow equations are handled with an classical Eulerian approach. Second, the deformation of the vesicle’s boundary (which can be described as a shell, membrane or bi-fluid interface) is done within a
Lagrangian frame and third, the fluid-structure interactions are handled via a forcing term that is
localized on the membrane domain. Numerous biological problems were approached in this manner, such as red blood cell motion [56], or cell growth and division [103, 50]. Later improvement of
the method includes the Immersed Finite Element Method [189], where the Lagrangian solid mesh
evolves on top of a background Eulerian mesh that covers the entire computational domain. This
simplifies greatly the mesh generation. Another computational method for the treatment of fluid-solid
interactions is the Immersed Particle Method, where both the fluid and the structure are described
using Lagrangian mesh free particles [135]. However, due to the lagrangian treatment of interfaces,
these methods becomes cumbersome when extreme deformations and subsequently severe distortions
of the finite element mesh or the particle distribution are observed. The use of mesh regularization
techniques [107] may provide a solution but they remain computationally expensive. When studying
vesicle permeation through porous media, a second challenge is to link macroscopic models, traditionally casted in terms of Darcy’s law [34] to the micromechanics of vesicle transport through a network.
Linking two very disparate length-scales is a long standing issue in computational methods as they
typically lead to simulation sizes that are too large to be computationally efficient, if feasible.
To address these issues, the objectives of the work are two-folds. First, we integrate a recently
developed Particle-based Moving Interface Method (PMIM) [64] to describe the mechanics of immersed
and porous interfaces [167, 168] with a numerical technique to describe creeping flow through a fibrous
network [66]. In this framework, the motion of an immersed soft vesicle is coupled with an Eulerian
fluid description via a particle-enriched interface that can evolve as dictated by mechanical force
equilibrium. Using an updated Lagrangian description of the vesicle, the motion of the deformable
vesicle is completely independent from the spatial numerical discretization and it enables a very precise
description of the curvature and motion of the vesicle over time. The method also use a enriched finite
element approach to match the analytical asymptotic fields near the tip of fibers to smoothen farfield velocity and pressure fields. This ensures that a high fidelity solution is obtained without using
refinement techniques. Note that the model is presented in two dimensions and fibers can actually
be better described as plates that extend to infinity in the third dimension. The second contribution
of the chapter is the introduction of a homogenization approach, inspired by research efforts in solid
mechanics [166], to bridge the microscale mechanics of flow and vesicle transport to the estimation
of the macroscale permeability of the network. For this, we introduce a so-called elementary volume
element in which one can computationally average the flux of fluid/vesicles subjected to macroscopic
pressure gradients. This operation eventually permits the determination of macroscopic network
permeabilities as illustrated in subsequent examples. To showcase the potential of the method, we
then predict the role of a microscopic parameter, the surface tension at the vesicle-solvent interface,
on the overall permeation of particles through the network. This study highlights the role of surface
tension, pressure differential and porosity configuration on the entry and perhaps immobilization of
66

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

the vesicle within a porous media. It should be noted that in our current model, the colloidal vesicle
is actually a deformable fluid ”cylinder” that extent in the third dimension. The closest physical
embodiment of this type of vesicles might be coalescing media for oil in water separations.
The chapter is organized as follows. In the next section, we provide a mathematical description
to describe the deformation of a soft fluid-like colloid interacting with an immersed fibrous network.
In section 3, we then discuss the numerical formulation based on a mixed-finite element and particle
method. Section 4 then concentrates on the derivation of a homogenization technique that bridges
the micro-mechanisms of vesicle permeation to macroscopic permeabilities. We finally conclude the
chapter with a discussion of the method, results and potential for improvement.

3.1

Multiscale mathematical formulation for a soft droplet in an
immersed fibrous network

3.1.1

Basic governing equations

Consider a two-dimensional incompressible viscous flow in a domain Ω delimited by a boundary ∂Ω
in which exists one or multiple no-slip rigid boundaries ΓF taking the shape of thin fibers (or plates)
(Fig.3.1). We also consider a number of closed vesicles, with boundaries ΓI and that are able to move
with the surrounding fluid. The problem is characterized by the Reynolds number Re = HV ρ/µ where
H is the characteristic length scale, V the characteristic fluid velocity, µ the kinematic viscosity and ρ
the fluid densities in and out of the vesicles. We choose here to remain in the Stokes flow assumption
with Re  1, where inertial effect may be neglected. The velocity of a fluid particle is given in terms
of its material time derivative v(x, t) = Dx/Dt, where x = {x y} is the current position of the fluid
particle at time t. Under these conditions, the governing equations and boundary conditions for the
Stokes flow are written:
∇·σ = 0

∀x ∈ Ω/Γ

(3.1)

∇·v = 0

∀x ∈ Ω/Γ

(3.2)

where σ is the Cauchy stress tensor in the fluid and the second equation imposes the condition of
incompressibility. These equations are combined with the moving interface problem:
[σ · n] = fI + fF/I

∀x ∈ ΓI

(3.3)

DXI (t)/Dt = v(x (XI , t), t)

∀x ∈ ΓI

(3.4)

Here XI denotes a point on the vesicle boundary, the vector n represent the normal direction to the
moving interface, the force fI is the unbalanced interface force due to its deformation and fF/I is the
interaction force between fibers and the moving interface. Finally, the boundary conditions for fluid
motion on the external boundary and on fibers read:
σ · n = po n
v(x, t) = 0
67

∀x ∈ ∂Ω

(3.5)

∀x ∈ ΓF .

(3.6)

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

where p0 is an external pressure surrounding the domain Ω, and a zero-velocity condition is applied
on the fiber domain. The latter assumption arises from the model that (a) the fiber are rigid and (b)
a no-slip condition is assumed between the fluid and the fibers.

3.1.2

Constitutive equations

To complement the above system of equation, a number of constitutive relation must be introduced.
They can be broken down into three components that describe in turns: (a) the behavior of the fluid,
(b) the mechanical behavior of the interface and (c) the interactions forces between interface and
fibers. In this work, we consider a simple incompressible Newtownian fluid with viscosity µ that can
be different within the colloids and the external fluid.
σ = µD − pI

(3.7)

where D is the rate of deformation and p is the hydrostatic pressure enforcing the incompressibility
condition. For the sake of simplicity, we consider here a bi-fluid interface without elastic stiffness and
characterized by the liquid-liquid surface tension γ between the vesicle and the continuum fluid. More
complex cases can later be considered as discussed in the first chapter. In these conditions, the force
fI of the interface can be written:
fI

= −γH

(3.8)

with H the mean curvature of the surface, computed in section 3.3 . Finally, the fiber-interface
interaction forces is considered to be of repulsive nature at short distance. For this initial modeling
effort, we have used an interaction energy function of the same form as the electrostatic potential
function. That is, the force is inversely proportional to the distance between hypothetical point
charges on the surface of the flake (fiber):
fF/I ∝ 1/φF (XI )

(3.9)

where φF is the distance function with respect to the fiber. Future work can incorporate more complex
formulations including van derWaals interactions.

3.1.3

A two-scale asymptotic solution to describe the fluid flow around thin fibers

When the diameter of fibers constituting the network is very small compared to characteristic size
of a particle, the above mathematical problem admits a solution that displays variation across three
disparate length-scales (Fig. 3.1): macroscopic fields variations are on the order of the domain size,
mesoscopic variations are on the order of the particle size and finally, microscopic fields vary on the
order of the fiber diameter size. This creates a significant issue to later derive an accurate numerical
solution at a reasonable computational cost. Inspired by asymptotic methods [77, 117], we here
propose to address the problem as follows; First, we derive a solution for the fluid flow around the
tip of a fiber and subjected to the far-fields boundary conditions. Then, we enrich our macroscopic
solution with this solution in the regions of interests, which result in introducing a limited number of
”microscopic” degrees of freedom. Finally, we compute a solution that ensures that both microscopic
68

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

Figure 3.1: fluid domain Ω, interface ΓI and fixed structure ΓF with no-slip/no-penetration boundary
condition. The local polar coordinate system is centred at the fiber tip and oriented in the direction of
the fiber.

and mesoscopic are consistent within the entire computational domain.
To simplify our analysis, let us first assume that the width of our fibers is infinitesimally small
compared to other dimensions of the problem. In this case, the flow field near the tip of fibers admits
a singular solution that was derived by Moffat in [118]. Adopting a polar coordinate system (r, θ)
p
centred on the fiber tip, where r = x02 + y 02 , θ = arctan (y 0 /x0 ) and the axis x0 and y 0 are aligned
with the fiber (Fig. 3.1). The streamline function ψ(r, θ) solution to the Stokes equation ∇ψ = 0 in
the region 0 < r  H can be written in the following separated form:
ψ(r, θ) = rα fα (θ)

(3.10)

where α is an unknown complex exponent that determines the structure of the flow, and is to be found
as part of the solution. Following [118], the function fα (θ) is written:
fα (θ) = A cos (αθ) + B sin (αθ) + C cos ((α − 2)θ) + D sin ((α − 2)θ)

(3.11)

where A, B, C and D are arbitrary complex constants. In the cases where α = 0, 1 or 2, the above
equation degenerates into other forms that are not relevant to the problem studied here, and we will
henceforth only consider values of α such that α 6= 0, 1, 2. The axial and radial velocities of the flow
are deduced from the stream function ψ(r, θ) as follows:
vr =

1 ∂ψ
r ∂θ

and

vθ = −

∂ψ
,
∂r

(3.12)

and are subjected to the following no-slip/no-penetration boundary conditions at the wall:
vr (r, θ = α) = 0, vθ (r, θ = α) = 0

(3.13)

Enforcing these boundary conditions on (3.12) and (3.11) yields the constant A, B, C and D [[118]]:
A = cos (α − 2)α, B = sin (α − 2)α, C = − sin αα and D = − cos αα
69

(3.14)

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

as well as the exponent α, found to be α = 3/2 in the particular case of infinitesimally thin fibers
[118]. The pressure can then be calculated by solving the momentum equation
∇p = µ∇2 v

(3.15)

where v = vr er + vθ eθ is computed using equations (3.10) and (3.12).

3.2

Numerical approach: the Particle Enriched Moving Interface
Method

The idea of the Extended Finite Element Method is to enrich a finite element space with additional
functions. Our numerical technique takes the same approach: the Stokes flow is solved using the
traditional C0 conforming finite elements (in our cases 4 node bilinear elements for the pressure and
9 node quadratic elements for the velocity) space, and we enrich this space with additional degrees of
freedom that allow the pressure jump across the interface (the velocity stays continuous) and singular
pressure and velocity fields around the corner tip. To enrich the standard finite element space, we
make use of the linearity of the Stokes flow and simply sum the enrichments for the pressure jump
and the asymptotic solution around the corner tip. The velocity and pressure fields in this enriched
space are therefore interpolated as follows:
p(x) =

X
i

j

+

X

Nj (x)(H(φI (x)) − Hj )p̌j

Ni (x)pi +

X

Nj (x)(H(φF (x)) − Hj )p̌j +

XX
k

Nk (Gl (r(x), θ(x)) − Gk )p̂k

l

(3.16)

j

X

v(x) =

i

N̂i (x)vi +

XX
k

N̂k (F l (r(x), θ(x)) − Fk )ṽk

(3.17)

l

where N and N̂ are the regular 4 nodes and 9 nodes shape functions, H is the Heaviside function
that provides the needed discontinuity, and F and G are the special asymptotic corner tip functions.
The terms φI and φF denote level-set functions, i.e. the signed distance functions with respect to
the interface and the fibers. Table 1 shows a summary of asymptotic functions used as enrichment
for both pressure and velocity fields calculated in chapter 2: The terms p̌j and p̂j correspond to the
Table 3.1: Corner tip asymptotic functions
G
F

 α−2
	
r
sin (αθ), rα−2 sin ((α1 − 2)θ), rα−2 cos (αθ), rα−2 cos ((α − 2)θ)
 α−1
r
sin ((α − 2)θ) sin θ, rα−1 cos ((α − 2)θ) cos θ ,
	
rα−1 sin ((α − 2)θ) cos θ, rα−1 cos ((α − 2)θ) sin θ

enriched degrees of freedom associated with the jump in pressure across the fibers and the droplet
interface respectively, while the terms p̃k and ṽk are the enrichment degrees of freedom associated with
the near corner tip pressure and velocity fields. In addition to the velocity and pressure degrees of
freedom and their respective enrichment, let us introduce the Lagrange multipliers λI and λIp . These
are used to enforce the no-slip/no-penetration boundary condition (3.6) on the corner walls and tip
70

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

Figure 3.2: Black dots denote tip enrichment for the velocity and pressure (only the four corner nodes
in the case of the pressure) while squares and triangles indicate split enrichment for the pressure for
the fibers and the interface respectively.

and the pressure jump condition at the interface. They are discretized at the intersection between
the corner walls and the underlying mesh for λI , and at the intersection between the interface and
the underlying mesh for λIp , as shown in Fig.3.2. They are interpolated along the interface Γ using
P
one-dimensional shape functions λi (x, t) = 2I=1 N̄ I (x)λIi (t) where I denotes the numbering of the
nodes for each segment of the corner walls, and i runs over the dimensions 1 and 2 (in 2D).

3.2.1

Weak formulation

Introducing the test functions wv , wp , wλ and wλp , integrating by parts and using the divergence
theorem, the weak form of the governing equations (4.14)-(4.16) in the fluid domain can be written
as: given the position XI at time t, find v ∈ V, p ∈ P, λ ∈ L and λp ∈ Lp such that for all wv ∈ V,
wp ∈ P, wλ ∈ L and wλp ∈ Lp

(∇wv , µ∇v)Ω − (∇wv , pI)Ω + (wv , ρf )Ω + (wv , λ)Γ + wv , fI + fR/I ) Γ = 0
(wp , ∇ · v)Ω + (wp , λp )Γ = 0
(wλp , [p])Γ + (wλp , (fI + fR/I ) · n)Γ = 0
(wλ , v)Γ = 0

(3.18)

where the notation (·, ·)Ω indicates the L2 inner product with respect to the domain Ω. The Lagrange
multipliers λ and λp enforce the no-slip/no-penetration boundary conditions (3.6) and the pressure
jump conditions on the implicitly defined corner walls. The test functions wλ and wλp are associated
with the Lagrange multipliers and V, P, L and Lp are admissible spaces for the velocity, pressure and
Lagrange multipliers.
71

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

3.2.2

Discretized form

The weak form (5.18) is then discretized in space by using the XFEM approximation, and after
simplifications yields the following linear system:
Kt dt = f t

(3.19)

where Kt is the consistent tangent matrix, dt = {v p λp λ} the global vector of unknowns and f t
the global force vector at time t. The element contribution to Kt and f t are as follows:


kevv

kevp

0

 e
 kpv
0
kepλp
k = 
 0 ke
0

λp p
keλv
0
0
e

kevλ



0



,



0

fe =

n

fve 0 fλep

0

oT

.

(3.20)

0

The form of the components in the ke matrix and and the f e are given in appendix A. The finite
element equation (3.19) can be solved with a linear solver to yield an expression for the fluid (and
interface) velocity v at time t. Given the interface velocity v, the position XI of the vesicle interface
ΓI is then updated to compute Kt+dt and f t+dt for the next time step, with dt the time step increment.
Once the vesicle has left the computational domain, or once ||dt+dt − dt || < T OL, the algorithm has
converged and the interface is in equilibrium with the surrounding fluid. The next step involves the
transport of the interface using a mesh-based particle method, as discussed next.

3.2.3

Grid based particle method for interface evolution

To track the deformation of the interface ΓI , we choose here to use a grid-based particle method similar
to what was introduced in [101]. This method indeed possesses the double advantage of tracking the
interface explicitly with particles while using the underlying fixed finite element mesh to ensure a
fairly uniform repartition of the particles on the interface. Here we summarize the grid based particle
method and discuss the update of the interface position and deformations measures. The particles,
whose position vector is denoted by y, are chosen as the normal projection of the underlying mesh
nodes, with position vector p, on Γ (Fig. 3.3a.). Initially, the interface is described implicitly as the
zero level-set of a signed distance function φI (p, t = 0). The initial coordinates of particles y can then
found as follows:
y = p − φI (p, 0)∇φI (p, 0)

(3.21)

To limit the number of particles, we define a so-called computational tube such that only nodes p
whose distance to ΓI is smaller than a cut-off value λtube are accounted for. It is important to note
here that there is a one to one correspondence between each particle y and node p. This ensure
a quasi-uniform repartition of particles along the interface throughout its evolution. Between two
subsequent time steps, the particles are moved according to the normal component of the interface
velocity v⊥ (ξ, t) as follows:
yt+dt = yt + v⊥ (yt , t)dt + Ω · v⊥ (yt , t)
72

dt2
2

(3.22)

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

where Ω is the matricial form of the angular velocity of the interface normal [88]:
 
⊥
ω = − v,ξ
[0 0 1]T and Ωik = ijk ωj
1

(3.23)

with ijk the permutation tensor and ξ1 the local coordinate running along the interface (Fig. 3.3b.).
After the motion of the interface, the particles y may not be the closest point on ΓI to their associated
nodes p. Moreover, the motion of the particles may cause their distribution on ΓI to become uneven,

Figure 3.3: (a) particles and associated nodes in the computational tube. (b) Local polynomial approximation of the surface (and of any Lagrangian field). The polynomial ξ 3 (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) that approximates
the interface is constructed via least square fitting using neighbouring particles in the local referential
{a0 , n̄0 } centered on particle y0 .

which can affect the geometrical resolution of the interface. To overcome this issue, the interface is
ressampled after motion by recomputing the particles as the closest points on ΓI to the nodes p inside
the updated computational tube (which has moved with the interface) (Fig.3.3a.). This is done by first
approximating the interface with polynomials locally around each particle. The procedure, explained
here in the two dimensional case, is as follows: for each node p inside the computational tube, the
closest m particles y0 ...ym are collected, carrying with them the tangent at0 ...atm and normal n̄t0 ...n̄tm
to the interface before motion. Denoting y0 as the particle closest to p, a polynomial of degree n < m
is fitted to the particles y0 ...ym in the local coordinate system {st0 ; n̄t0 } centered on y0 (Fig.3.3b). The
location ỹi of particle i in this local coordinate system is given by:
(
ỹi =

ξi1
ξi2

)

"
= Rt · (yi − y0 ) with Rt =

(at0 )T
(n̄t0 )T

#
.

(3.24)

Taking the example of a quadratic polynomial (n = 2), the interface around particle y0 is represented
in the local referential as the graph function ξ 2 (ξ 1 ) = c0 + c1 ξ 1 + c2 (ξ 1 )2 , where the coefficients c0 , c1
and c2 are found by minimizing the L2 difference between the ξ 2 (ξi1 ) and the ξi2 . The coordinates
 1 2 1 	
ξ , ξ (ξ ) defines a local parameterization rl (ξ 1 ) of Γ in the neighbourhood of y0 :
(
l

1

r (ξ ) =

ξ1
ξ 2 (ξ 1 )

73

)
.

(3.25)

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

The relationship between the local parameterization rl (ξ 1 ) and the global parameterization XI (ξ 1 )
defined in section 2.1 is then found via rotation and translation operations in the form:
XI (ξ 1 , t + dt) = (Rt )−1 rl (ξ 1 ) + y0 .

(3.26)

The parameterization XI (ξ 1 , t + dt) can now be used to ressample the interface, i.e. recalculate the
closest point on the interface to the nodes p. This is done by minimizing the distance function


d(r(ξ 1 , t + dt); p) = 1/2 r(ξ 1 , t + dt) − p with respect to ξ 1 . In two dimensions, the solution can be
found explicitly by solving a cubic equation. Other geometrical quantities can also be found using the

	
parameterization XI (ξ 1 , t + dt), such as the updated basis at+dt , n̄t+dt :
at+dt = r(ξ 1 , t + dt),1 = Rt

∂rl (ξ 1 , t + dt)
∂ξ1

n̄t+dt = at+dt × z/|at+dt × z|.

(3.27)
(3.28)

and the mean curvature can be found as follows [[102]]:
H =

ξ200
(1 + ξ20 )3/2

(3.29)

where 0 denotes the derivative with respect to ξ1 . Finally, a new level-set function φI (p, t + dt) can be
calculated as the signed distance function to ΓI at nodes p as follows:
φI (p, t + dt) = −sgn(

yt+dt − p
· n̄t )|yt+dt − p|,
|yt+dt − p| 0

(3.30)

where yt+dt is the particle associated with p at time t + dt and the sign function sgn(((yt+dt −
p)/|yt+dt − p|) · n̄t0 ) determines whether node p is in Ω+ or Ω− . The reconstruction of the level-set
function using the local polynomial approximation of the interface is computationally inexpensive,
and is used in the X-FEM part of the algorithm.

3.2.4

Validation for the pressure/velocity field in the tip vicinity

Here we investigate the accuracy of the numerical technique by comparing it with the analytical
solution developed by Moffat [118] for the velocity and the pressure field around the fiber tip, with
and without a circular droplet in the vicinity. The velocity given by the analytical solution is imposed
at the boundary of the computational domain. The Reynolds number is given by:
Re =

V rReal[λ]
ν

(3.31)

with µ the kinematic viscosity and V the fluid velocity away from the corner. The parameters V
and µ are chosen such that Re  1 everywhere in the computational domain. The error made in
74

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

Figure 3.4: Error Ev made in computing the flow velocity around the corner tip in mode I and II,
for different corner angle α. The error can be lessened by more then a factor of 10 using corner tip
enrichment.
computing the velocity of the flow near a corner is calculated as follows:
Z

x1

Ev =
x
Z x0 1

Ep =
x0

||vnum (x) − vasymp (x)||
dx,
||vasymp (x)||
||pnum (x) − pasymp (x)||
dx
||pasymp (x)||

(3.32)
(3.33)

where vnum denotes the velocity calculated using the numerical method, vasymp the asymptotic solution and x0 , x1 two points in the vicinity of the fiber tip (Fig.3.4a.).
Table 3.2: Error made in computing the pressure and velocity fields Ep and Ev , without enrichment,
with enrichment and with a vesicle in the vicinity of the fiber tip.

Ev
Ep

w/o enrichment
18.2%
22.1%

with enrichment
0.7%
3.1%

with enrichment & vesicle
0.7%
3.1%

The circular vesicle in the neighbourhood of the fiber tip is shown in Fig.3.4a., as well as a close
up of the singular pressure field around the fiber tip and the pressure jump across the vesicle interface.
Fig.3.4b. shows the velocity and the pressure field in the neighbourhood of the fiber tip, along the line
from point x0 to x1 . We observe in table 2 that without enrichment, the errors Ev and Ep are fairly
high, at 18.2% and 22.1% respectively. However, the incorporation of the tip enrichment developed
above reduces the errors down to 0.7% and 3.1% respectively. The presence of a circular vesicle in the
vicinity of the fiber tip does not significantly affect the accuracy of the scheme, and we can note the
75

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

appearance of a pressure jump across the vesicle interface from its surface tension, as expected. The
source of the remaining error stems from the weak enforcement of the no-slip/no-penetration condition
on the corner wall. Future studies will investigate reducing the error by using quadratic instead of
linear shape function for the interpolation of Lagrange multipliers. Overall, the numerical technique
presented here is shown to significantly increase the accuracy of the simulation of a flow near a sharp
corner using the extended finite element method, at a much lesser computational cost than classical
methods since no mesh refinement is needed.

3.3

Numerical approach to predict the permeation of a soft colloids
though a fibrous network

In this section, we present a generalized homogenization scheme to determine how different phases
of a fluid (such as solvent or various vesicles present in the solvent) can permeate through a fibrous
filtration membrane. For this, we first present a general homogenization scheme based on the HillMendel conditions that then served as a basis to express macroscopic permeabilities in terms of flux
and pressure on the boundary of a volume element. We then apply these concepts to the specific
problem of soft vesicles travelling through a small fibrous network and pay particular attention to the
role of surface tension at the vesicle-solvent interface.

Figure 3.5: Periodic assumption of a fibrous network with a population of permeating particles. A unit
periodic cell is identified and analysized to extract the macroscopic properties of the network.

3.3.1

General homogenization scheme to compute macroscopic permeabilities

From a macroscopic viewpoint, the phenomenon of fluid flow through porous media has traditionally
been described by Darcy’s law relating volumic flux to pressure gradient throughout a porous network.
¯ is established
The relationship between the flux Qα of fluid α and the macroscopic pressure gradient ∇p̄
via the definition of so-called macroscopic permeability tensor κα in the form
Qα = −

κα ¯
∇p̄
µα
76

(3.34)

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

where µα is the fluid viscosity. We note that for isotropic porous network such as those studied in this
chapter, the permeability can be expressed in terms of a single scalar quantity κα such that κα = κα I
with I representing the second order identity tensor.

It is clear here that the quantity κα represents the ease by which a fluid permeated through the network. Theoretically, it may therefore be determined through a thorough study of the micromechanisms
of vesicle flow and deformation and a consistent averaging operation to bridge micro to macroscale.
We propose here to use classical homogenization theory where we assume that at the mesoscale, a
membrane is made of a periodic array of unit cells comprised of a pseudo-random fiber distribution.
For the sake of simplicity, we also assume that a number of vesicles can be found within each of these
cells and that they all have the same position relative the their corresponding unit cells (Fig. 3.5). For
each elementary volume (of dimension, W × H), it is possible to introduce a local coordinate system
(ξ, η) whose origin is at the center of the volume. With this, it is possible to express the microscopic
pressure field p in such a domain as a first order expansion as follows:

¯ (t) · ξ + ∆p̃(t)
p(ξ, t) = ∇p̄

(3.35)

¯ is the macroscopic pressure gradient and ∆p̃(t) is a fluctuation field arising from the presence
where ∇p̄
of random fibers and vesicles in the domain. Using the fact that the macroscopic pressure gradient is
an average of the microscopic pressure gradient over the unit cell, one can show that:
¯ = 1
∇p̄
∆t

Z
∆t



1
V0



Z

1
(∇p)dV dt =
∆t
Ω

Z



∆t

1
V0



Z

pndS dt

(3.36)

Γ

with n the unit vector normal to the boundary Γ and V0 the volume of the domain. Note that we
used the divergence theorem to obtain the last equality. The above relation is particularly useful as
it enables to characterise the macroscopic pressure gradient in terms of the microscopic pressure field
on the boundary of the unit cell. We also obtain that
1
∆t

Z
∆t



1
V0


p̃dV dt = 0

Z

(3.37)

Ω

In other words, the macroscopic average of the microscopic fluctuation fields identically vanish. To
further establish a relationship between fluxes and pressure gradients, we invoke the Hill-Mendel
condition on energy dissipation. More precisely, we postulate that the macroscopic energy dissipation
per unit volume and time is equal to the average of the microscopic dissipation over the elementary
volume and during a characteristic time period ∆t. Note that this elementary time increment is related
to the time needed for a vesicle α to go through the elementary volume. We write:

¯ V ∆t =
Qα · ∇p̄

Z

Z


(qα · pn)dS dt

∆t

(3.38)

Γ

On the left hand side, we expressed the energy dissipation of a Darcy-type flow over a volume V0 =
W × H × 1 and a period ∆t. On the right hand side, we expressed this same energy in terms of
the product of surface forces pn where p is the pressure and n the normal to the boundary, and the
velocity v of fluid particle moving across the boundary. Substituting the expression (3.35) for p into
77

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

(3.38) and identifying the terms, one can show that:
1
Qα =
∆t



Z
∆t

1
V0



Z

(qα · n)ξdS dt

(3.39)

Γ

This establishes a relation between the macroscopic volumic flux Q̄α and the microscopic flux qα
across the boundary of the elementary volume. The macroscopic permeability can then be numerically
determined by relating the macroscopic flux (3.39) to pressure gradient (3.43) via equation (3.34).

Figure 3.6: Schematic of the geometry, dimensions and boundary conditions for assessing the permeation of a soft colloid particle through a fibrous network.

3.3.2

Application to the numerical evaluation of the permeation of soft colloidal
particles

Let us now apply the above findings to the computation of a network permeability to two fluids: (a)
the solvent and (b) the immersed vesicles. To simplify the analysis, we consider a two-dimensional
vertical porous flow (Fig. 3.6) for which boundary conditions are given in terms of the macroscopic
solvent flow qs = V and a no-flux boundary condition on the left and right boundaries of the domain.
The relevant quantities to compute are therefore (a) the overall vertical solvent flux Qsy , (b) the overall
¯ y p̄. For each simulation, the
vertical vesicle flux Qs and the vertical macroscopic pressure gradient ∇
v

elementary time ∆t is computed as the time required for a vesicle to travel the entire (vertical) length
of the domain.
Flux. For this particular problem, the homogenization relation (3.39) becomes, for the solvent:
1
Qsy =
W H∆t

"Z

Z

#

W/2

(−HV dξ) dt = −V
∆t

(3.40)

ξ=−W/2

where the final equality was obtained by realizing that the volumic flux of the fluid across the boundary
is constant in time. The volumic flux of vesicle can similary be computed by:
Qvy

1
=
W H∆t

Z
∆t

"Z

#

W/2

(−Hvv dξ) dt = −f v

ξ=−W/2

H
∆t

(3.41)

where we used the fact that for incompressible fluids, the cumulative volumic flux entering the domain
78

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

during a time interval ∆t is equal to the volume Ωv in the vesicle. In other words, we have:
v

Z

"Z

W/2

#
(vv dξ) dt

Ω =
∆t

(3.42)

ξ=−W/2

This relation, together with the expression of the volume fraction of a vesicle f v = Ωv /(W H) yields
the second equality in (3.41). This result indicates that the volumic flux of vesicles is proportional to
their volume fraction and inversely proportional to the time ∆t needed to travel a vertical distance H
in the network.
Pressure gradient. As mentioned above, we are here interested in computing the vertical macro¯ y p̄. Using (3.43) for the geometry shown in Fig. 3.6, it is straightforward to
scopic velocity gradient ∇
show that:
¯ y p̄ =
∇

1
HW ∆t


Z 
H
H
p(ξ, ) − p(ξ, − ) dξdt
2
2
∆t Γ

Z

(3.43)

Numerically, the above spatial integrals over the top and bottom boundaries of the domain can be
evaluated using a surface gausian quadrature rule while the time integral can be evaluated using the
trapezoidal rule.
Macroscopic permeabilities With the knowledge of (3.40), (3.41) and (3.43), it is now possible
to compute the macroscopic permeabilities of the network. Indeed, writing (3.34) in the vertical
direction, it is straightforward to show that:
µV
κs = ¯
∇y p̄

and

κv =

µHf v
¯ y p̄
∆t ∇

(3.44)

In summary, our numerical approach can be divided into four steps: (a) Build a fibrous network,
apply given boundary conditions and simulate the permeation of a vesicle through the elementary
volume, (b) Determine the elementary time ∆t, (c) Using numerical integration of the boundary of
the elementary volume, compute fluxes and pressure gradients as given by (3.40), (3.41) and (3.43)
and (d) Compute the macroscopic permeabilities using (3.44).

3.3.3

Numerical investigation of the role of surface tension soft vesicles permeation

The objective of this last section is to illustrate how the proposed numerical and homogenization
scheme can give precious insights regarding the effect of vesicle deformability on its permeation through
a fibrous network. For this, we consider the problem shown in Fig. 3.6 and studied four quasi-random
fibrous networks distinguished by similar fiber densities and distributions. For each network, we then
investigate the permeation of vesicles that are characterized by a range of deformability, measured
in terms of a nondimensional capillary number Ca = µV /γ. Small capillary numbers correspond to
vesicles with high surface tension and low deformability; in contrast, a high capillary number reduces
the solvent-vesicle surface tension and allows vesicles to undergo very large deformation and flow
though narrow pores. Other parameters needed to describe the permeation of the vesicle include the
79

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

non-dimensional time and permeabilities, written as:
t∗ =

tH
,
V

κ∗s =

κs
κv
and κ∗v =
κ̄
κ̄

(3.45)

where κ̄ is the average fluid permeability for networks 1-4 without vesicle. The simulations were run on
finite element mesh of size 26×31 (806 elements), sufficiently small to resolve the high curvature of the
vesicle interface at large capillary numbers. Due to the presence of second order terms (e.g. the mean
curvature) in the force generated by the vesicle-solvent surface tension, the explicit time evolutive
simulations are subjected to a strict Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) condition on the time step of the
second order in mesh size dt ≈ O(∆h)2 , with ∆h the size of a single element. In this context, Fig.
3.7 shows the history of the non-dimensional speed of the vesicle vv /V as it travels through network
1 for capillary numbers Ca = 0.04 (Fig.3.7a) and Ca = 0.2 (Fig.3.7b). We observe that for a capillary
number low enough (Ca = 0.04), the vesicle is too rigid to squeeze through the network (Fig. 3.7a).
As a result, it remains trapped between two fibers while the surrounding fluid is diverted away from
the obstructed pore. For higher capillary numbers (Ca = 0.2), the vesicle is slowed downed at the
pore but is deformable enough to fully permeate through the same network (Fig 3.7b). These two
example clearly indicate that deformation, in addition to size, dictate wether a vesicle can go through
a porous medium. We further see that low deformability may result in the accumulation of trapped
vesicles within the network and thus decrease the overall effective permability. This phenomenon is
known as fouling [REF].

Figure 3.7: Vesicle speed as a function of non-dimensionalized time t∗ for network 1, Ca = 0.04 (a)
and Ca = 0.2 (b).

Let us now turn to the macroscopic effects of these observations. For this, we compute for each network
and capillary numbers the macroscopic permeabilities given in (3.44). For clarity, we particularly
focus on understanding how the non-dimensional vesicle and solvent permeabilities κ∗v and κ∗s change
as functions of the capillary number Ca in Fig. 3.8 and Fig. 3.9 respectively. For all networks,
we observe, as expected, that the vesicle permeability decreases with the capillary number, since
less deformable vesicles have more difficulties squeezing through the tight pores. We also note that
the vesicle permeability decreases to zero in the cases where the capillary number is low enough to
cause the vesicle to be permanently trapped into the pores (fouling). On the other hand, the vesicle
permeability is shown to approach that of the fluid without vesicle as the capillary number increases.
80

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

Similarly, the solvent permeability κ∗f is shown to decrease with the capillary number in Fig. 3.9. This
is explained by the fact that more rigid vesicles hinder the fluid flow through the network, and that
pores can be permanently obstructed by the most rigid vesicles. More importantly, even when pores
are not obstructed, Fig. 3.9 shows that the presence of the vesicles can lessen the fluid permeability
by as much as 20% for the network studied here.

Figure 3.8: Vesicle permeability as a function of the capillary number Ca =

Figure 3.9: Fluid permeability as a function of the capillary number Ca =
81

µU
γ

µU
γ

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

3.4

Summary and future work

We have described a new numerical modeling approach that can be used to quantitatively examine the
interplay between a rigid media’s structure, the surface energy of deformable, immiscible, suspended
particles (vesicles), and an externally imposed continuum flow, on the particles’ conductance through
that media. The novelty of the approach is two-fold: (a) the inclusion of locally-explicit continuum
solutions for the pressure and velocity fields that eliminate the need for the computational cost of mesh
refinement and (b) the derivation of a numerical homogenization scheme that permits to calculate the
macroscopic permeabilities of a fibrous network for complex fluids. We have illustrated the usefulness of
the approach by performing a study on an idealized two-dimensional problem containing deformable,
”cylindrical-shaped” vesicles being transported in a simple fluid through a media containing rigid
flakes (which project as ”fibers” in our 2-d problem). The major macroscopic figures-of-merit were
the permeability coefficients of the continuous fluid and the vesicles. For the range of parameters
studied, our results have illustrated that vesicles are always retarded relative to the continuum flow,
and that the relative selectivity for the continuum versus the vesicle is inversely proportional to the
Capillary number (based on the vesicle’s surface energy relative to the continuum fluid). Overall,
these results show the capability of the proposed approach to both accurately describe the micro-scale
physics of a vesicle permeation, and their effects at the macroscale in terms of effective permeability
estimations. A number of improvements is however necessary to increase the fidelity of the models.
First, a thorough study of the physical interaction between fibers and vesicles must be carried out.
For instance, the consideration of a repulsive force between the two entities in the proposed study
ultimately facilitated the flow of vesicles away from fibers. In an alternate case, where fiber-vesicle
adhesion occurs, one may predict very different behaviors [42]. Our two-dimensional (2D) assumptions
may also drastically affect the overall behavior of the system for several reasons. First, in 3D, one might
expect a lower flow resistance from the fibers, but an increase in fiber-fiber connections, which might
act as traps for vesicles. On the other hand, 3D vesicles possess more deformation potential to escape
from these obstacles. From a modeling viewpoint, the proposed computational scheme is applicable
in 3D although it is not straightforward. Asympotic flows around fibers and the deformation of 3D
vesicles are indeed significantly more complex than in a 2D setting, involving numerous theoretical and
numerical challenges. Such research endeavors are however necessary as a fundamental undertanding
of the interactions between soft vesicles and porous media can help design new membranes for medical
and energy applications [73, 2], but also help understand fundamental problems in biology such as the
interactions between cells and their surrounding fibrous matrix [65, 162, 169].

Appendix A
Using the spatial discretization scheme from section 3, the components of the matrix ke and vector f e
take the following form:
82

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

Z
kvv =

µBT · B dΩ

(3.46a)

−BT · N̂ dΩ

(3.46b)

NT · N̄dΓ

(3.46c)

N̂T · B dΩ

(3.46d)

N̄T · NdΓ

(3.46e)

N̄T · N̂dΓ

(3.46f)

N̂T · N̄dΓ

(3.46g)

Ωe

kevp =

Z

kevλ =

Z

kepv

Z

Ωe

Γe

=
e

keλv =
keλp p =
kepλp =

ZΩ

e
ZΓ
e
ZΓ

Γe

and
fve
fλep

Z

Z

T

N · ρf dΩ +

=
Ωe

Z
=
Γe

Γe

NT · (fI + fR/I ) dΓ.

(3.47)

N̄T n · (fI + fR/I ) dΓ.

(3.48)

The shape function matrices N, N̂, N̂ and B take the following form:
h
i
N = N1 , ..., N9 , Ñ1 , ..., Ñ9
h
i
ˇ
ˇ ˜
˜
N̂ = N̂ 1 , ..., N̂ 4 , N̂ 1 , ..., N̂ 4 , N̂ 1 , ..., N̂ 4


N̄ = N̄ 1 N̄ 2
i
h
B = B1 , ..., B9 , B̃1 , ..., B̃9

(3.49a)
(3.49b)
(3.49c)
(3.49d)

with
"
i

N =

Ni

0

0

Ni

#

"
i

, Ñ =

"
1

(F − F )

Ni

0

0

Ni

#

"
8

, ..., (F − F )

Ni

0

0

Ni

##

h
i
ˇ
˜
N̂ i = (H − H i )N̂ i , N̂ i = (G − G1 )N̂ i , ..., (G − G4 )N̂ i


N,1i
0


 0 N,2i 
i


B = i

N
0
 ,2

0 N,1i



(F − F 1 )N i ),1
0
(F − F 8 )N i ),1
0



1
i


0
(F − F )N ),2 
0
(F − F 8 )N i ),2

 , ..., 
B̃i = 
 (F − F 1 )N i )

 (F − F 8 )N i )
0
0
,2
,2



1
i
0
(F − F )N ),1
0
(F − F 8 )N i ),1

83

(3.50a)
(3.50b)

(3.50c)




 .



(3.50d)

CHAPTER 3. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE INTERACTION BETWEEN SOFT COLLOID PARTICLES AND IMMERSED FIBROUS
NETWORK

where F i and Gi are the asymptotic functions used to enriched the standard finite element space
around the corner tips introduced earlier.

84

Chapter 4

Applications of the Immersed
Membrane formulation to the study of
the membrane-cortex complex
In this chapter we use the formulation presented in chapter two to describe the rich mechanics and
interactions between the cell membrane and cortex and between the membrane and the external
environment. The formulation takes into account the mechanics of both the lipid bilayer membrane and
the cortex as well as their interactions. We show that these considerations are of critical importance
in situations that lead to debonding between the two the membrane and the cortex, as it is the
case in the cell blebbing problem for example. The formulation is then coupled with the Extended
Finite Element Method (X-FEM), a numerical method that naturally allows for pressure and velocity
discontinuities across the membrane, and the grid bases particle method that allows us to accurately
track the membrane geometry and large deformations as it evolves in a Eulerian frame.
The outline of this chapter is as follows: first we provide a biological and mechanical description of
the MCC, and introduce the main constitutive equations. In section 3.2, the mathematical formulation
used to describe the membrane mechanics, membrane-cortex interactions, and the membrane-fluid interactions in a Eulerian framework is presented, followed with the derivation of the governing equations
from energetic considerations. Section 3.3 discusses the numerical implementation in the framework of
the X-FEM and the grid based particle method. In section 3.4, the problems of the cell blebbing and
the cell endocytosis are investigated to demonstrate the model’s abilities to describe the rich mechanics
of the MCC. Section 3.5 finally concludes with a discussion of the results and recommendations for
future improvements.

4.1

The physics of the membrane-cortex complex and its interactions

In many biological problems such as endocytosis, blebbing or the red blood cell biconcavity, the
evolution of the shape the cell is driven by the mechanics of the cell membrane and its interaction
and adhesion with surrounding fluids or objects. In order to understand the debonding that occurs
during cell blebbing between the membrane and the cortex, or the intake by the cell membrane of
85

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

nanoparticles during endocytosis, one must therefore first investigate the mechanics of each component
as well as the forces responsible for their interactions.

4.1.1

The mechanics of the membrane-cortex complex

In most cells the membrane consists of the juxtaposition of two layers: the lipid bilayer and the cortex,
often refereed as the membrane-cortex complex. The lipid bilayer itself is made of a double layer of
phospholipids, whose hydrophylic heads point outside of the membrane and hydrophobic tails point in
to the core of the membrane. Attached to the lipid bilayer via membrane-cortex attachment proteins
is the cortex, composed of a mesh of actin/myosin/spectrin filaments that provides the cell with
resistance to deformations and possesses contractile abilities [32] (Fig.4.1.). The membrane-cortex

Figure 4.1: Global scheme of the cell membrane with the detailed parts of the cortex and the lipid
bilayer
complex is generally viewed as an elastic membrane with values of stretching and bending stiffnesses
that vary with the type of cell considered. For example, a leukocyte (or white blood cell) has reserves
of membrane area stored in micro-folds that reduce its stretching stiffness whereas the membrane of
a erythrocyte (or red blood cell) has no such reserves and is assumed in most studies to be essentially
inextensible (maximum area change ≤ 4% [136]). Some biological processes, such as cell blebbing
can lead to debonding between the cortex and the lipid bilayer by rupturing the membrane-cortex
attachment proteins. In this context, the cortex and the lipid bilayer become two separate membranes
with different parameters of elasticity. The mechanical characteristics of the membrane also vary with
the scale of the problem considered: in the case of endocytosis, only the lipid bilayer mechanics are
relevant in the uptake of nanoparticles by the cell membrane since the spacing between the cortical
filament (200 nm) is much larger than the size of the particles (10 − 20 nm). Here, we propose to
model the MCC, the cortex and the lipid bilayer as elastic membranes with different elasticies. In
this view, let us consider a generic elastic membrane (that can be the MCC, the cortex or the lipid
bilayer) whose geometry is characterized by a thickness negligible compared to its other dimensions.
The analysis of this membrane can then be viewed as a multiscale problem. At the microscale, the
membrane is described as a thin layer of thickness h with a elastic energy density W, function of the
membrane strain E that varies along the membrane thickness. At the mesoscale, the membrane is

considered as a zero-thickness surface in which the strain E = E Ēip , C̄ip and the elastic energy
86

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX


density Φ̄ = Φ̄ Ēip , C̄ip can be approximated as functions of the membrane in-plane strain Ēip and
second fundamental form C̄ip . An averaging operation is then introduced in order to reconcile the
microscopic and mesoscopic descriptions of the membrane, such that the elastic energy and densities
at the two scales are related as follows [167]:
1
Φ̄ =
h

Z

h/2

Φ̄dr3
−h/2

1
and ρ̃ =
h

Z

h/2

ρdr3

(4.1)

−h/2

Although the formulation allows for more complex strain energy functions, we here concentrate on a
linear elastic material with a quadratic elastic energy density function:
1
1
ip
ip
Φ̄(Ēip , C̄ip ) = Φ̄0 + T0 : Ēip + Ēip : C : Ēip + M0 : C̄ip + Cip : D : C̄ip + Ē
| :F
{z : C̄ }
2
2
{z
} |
{z
}
|
mixed
strain energy
bending energy

(4.2)

where W0 is the initial energy (per mass) stored in the membrane when undeformed, T0 and M0 are
the pre-stress and pre-moment and the fourth order tensor C is the elasticity tensor. In addition, the
tensors D and F (also fourth order) characterize the resistance to bending and the interaction between
the two modes of deformation Ēip and C̄ip . For the sake of clarity and as it does not introduces major
changes, the interaction between the different deformation modes are neglected by choosing F = 0.
Let us now detail the elastic parameters used in the strain and bending energy for the cortex and the
lipid bilayer:
Strain energy. The cortex is idealized as a permeable isotropic linear elastic membrane with
contractile abilities. The pre-stress T0 can therefore be directly related to the surface tension created
by the contraction of the acto-myosin complexes that are present throughout the cortex. Furthermore,
for a linear elastic material the elasticity tensor is written as C = λ̄1 ⊗ 1 + 2µ̄I, with λ̄ and µ̄ the first
and second Lamé coefficients. On the other hand, the lipid bilayer is usually described as a surface
fluid with no resistance to shear forces but high resistance to surface dilation. This behavior can be
modelled by choosing an incompressible linear elastic material (but not inextensible, since the lipid
bilayer can sustain around 4% of surface dilation) where the first and second Lamé coefficient are
respectively equal to the bulk modulus λ̄ = K̄ and zero µ̄ = 0. However, in certain types of cells such
as leukocytes for examples, the presence of undulation of the lipid bilayer over the cortex has been
observed. These undulations, stabilized by the membrane-cortex bonds, constitute a reserve of lipid
bilayer area (that can reach up to 2.6 time the apparent area in some white blood cells) that impart
the membrane with a non-linear elastic behavior and allow it to endure deformations much larger than
4% in processes such a cell blebbing. A constitutive relation between the membrane tension and the
membrane increase of area was introduced in [136] as:
kb T
cτm A
∆A
 =
=
ln 1 + lipid
A0
8πkc
Kh
with  =

∆A
A0

!
+

τm
KA

(4.3)

the membrane dilation or relative increase of apparent area, KA the elastic modulus for

direct stretchm, kb T the thermal energy, c=0.1 reflects the type of modes used to describe the undulations and τm the membrane tension. Eq.4.3 has two main regimes: for low values of area increase, the
87

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

membrane stiffness remains low and increases logarithmically, which corresponds to the smoothing of
the membrane undulations. For higher values of area increase, the lipid bilayer is completely smoothed

Figure 4.2: Fig (a) shows the tension-dilation curve for the unfolding membrane [136]. In Fig (b) we
see the behaviour of the function fb for different values of parameters Kb , fb 0 and nb .

out and enters a pure stretch regime, that is governed by an elastic linear relationship with a much
higher elastic modulus, making the lipid bilayer essentially inextensible (Fig.4.2a). From equation
(4.3), one can find the lipid bilayer non-linear bulk modulus λ̄() = K̄() such that τm = K̄().
Finally, the pre-stress T0 is taken to be zero in the case of the lipid bilayer since it has not been shown
to exhibit contractile abilities.
Bending energy. For both the cortex and the lipid bilayer, we choose to use the widely accepted Canham-Helfrich bending energy, with different bending stiffnesses as the cortex offers a greater
resistance to bending than the lipid bilayer. The Canham-Helfrich energy is written Eh (C̄ip ) =
Kh /2(H − C0 )2 + Kg K with H and K the mean and Gauss curvatures, Kh and Kg the bending
parameters and C0 the spontaneous curvature [78]. If the membrane is closed (as it is the case in the
different problems considered here), the Gaussian curvature energy Kg K has no contribution and can
be discarded.
With the elasticity parameters defined, the elastic energy densities for the cortex and the lipid bilayer now reads:
K cortex
1
cortex Φ̄(Ēip , C̄ip ) = T0 : Ēip + Ēip : C : Ēip + h
(H − C0 )2
2
2
|
{z
} |
{z
}
strain energy
bending energy
lipid bilayer Φ̄(Ēip , C̄ip ) =

K lipid
1/2K̄2 + h (H − C0 )2
| {z }
| 2
{z
}
strain energy bending energy
88

(4.4)

(4.5)

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

where  = tr Ēip and H = tr C̄ip . Having defined the strain and bending energy densities of both the
cortex and the lipid bilayer membrane, let us now turn to the Membrane-cortex attachment energy to
investigate the mechanical behavior of the MCC, and in particular the debonding between the lipid
bilayer membrane and the cortex that occurs during cell blebbing.
Membrane-cortex attachment energy. The interaction between the lipid bilayer membrane
and the cortex plays a critical role in many cellular processes. Under normal conditions, the lipid
bilayer membrane and the cortex are bonds together via an ensemble of attachment proteins or bonds
called ERM (Exrin/Radixin/Moesin). However, when subjected to sufficiently large forces, these
bonds start disassembling, effectively freeing the lipid bilayer from the cortex. This mechanism is at
the origin of the large spherical membrane protrusions, or blebs, observed in cell motility processes for
example. Here we propose to model the membrane to cortex bonds using the following assumptions:
(1) the force in one bond follows Hook’s law of elasticity: fb = Kb d, with d distance from the bond’s
resting position, and Kb the elasticity modulus [58, 186], and (2) the bonds probability to disassemble
increases exponentially with the force to which the bonds are subjected [17]. To model the later assumption, we choose to use the Weibullprobability
of failure [182], function of the force in the bond

fb
and written as follows: P (fb ) = 1 − exp − fb0 , where fb0 is related to the critical force fcrit at which
the bond starts failing, found to be fcrit =5 pN in [25], via the relation fb0 = fcrit exp (1) = 13.5pN .
One can now compute the force per unit area fb that binds the lipid bilayer to the cortex as the force
in one bond times its probability of failure multiplied by the bonds surface density nb as follows:




Kb d
fb
n̄ = Kb d nb exp −
n̄
fb = fb nb exp −
fb0
fb0

(4.6)

where n̄ is the unit vector normal to the surface. Using the experimental results from [29] the bonds
surface density is found to be nb = 100/nm2 and the elasticity modulus Kb = 2.25 · 10−2 pN/nm is
computed from [30] by matching the energy required for debonding. Fig.4.2b shows the behavior of
the attachment force for different parameter values: reducing the bond elastic modulus Kb increases
the total energy required to break the bonds, whereas decreasing the bond density nb or the bond
critical force fb0 has the opposite effect. The membrane-cortex attachment energy (or power) density
can then be found as the force fb times the membrane-cortex relative displacement (or velocity).
Finally, the MCC total elastic energy is computed as the sum of the lipid bilayer membrane and
cortex elastic energy plus the membrane-cortex attachment energy. Lets us now turn to the interaction between the lipid bilayer membrane and the external environment, and in particular to the
adhesion forces that allow the cell to intake external particles during the endocytosis process.

4.1.2

Interaction of the membrane with the outer environment

An important aspect of the MCC mechanics is to understand how the cell (and particularly the
membrane) senses and interacts with its external environment. Membrane adhesion is at the heart
of these interactions and plays a primordial role in the intake of external bodies such as vesicles,
viruses or other nanoparticles [18]. This process known as endocytosis is one of the mechanisms the
cell uses to absorb particles that are too large to simply diffuse through the lipid bilayer membrane.
89

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

Here, we choose to focus on the receptor mediated endocytosis that is used by the cell for the uptake
of particles with a diameter of the order of tens of nanometers. In this context, the mechanism
of endocytosis consists in the wrapping of particles by the lipid bilayer until complete absorption.
During this process, two forces are at play and compete against each other: the adhesion between the
membrane and the particle and the lipid bilayer bending resistance. If the adhesion that pulls the
membrane toward the particle is strong enough to overcome the lipid bilayer bending resistance, the
particle becomes completely wrapped and eventually absorbed inside the cell. On the other hand, if
the bending resistance is stronger than the adhesion forces, only partial wrapping is observed and the
endocytosis process cannot be achieved.

One of the well accepted models for the cell adhesion was proposed by [18], who developed a
thermodynamic approach to the cell adhesion. In this work, three main variables are at play: the
concentration of free ligand on the particle surface, the concentration of free receptors on the membrane
surface, and the number of bound ligand-receptor complexes (Fig.4.3a.). The system’s equilibrium is
found by minimizing its total free energy ∆G given by:
∆G = [(Nr − Nb ) (µr (Nr − Nb )) − Nr (µr (Nr ))] +
+ [(Nl − Nb ) (µl (Nl − Nb )) − Nl (µl (Nl ))] +

(4.7)

+ Nb (µb (S, Nb )) + Γ (d)
where Nr , Nl and Nb are the densities (number per unit surface) of free receptors, ligands and bounds
respectively, and µr , µl and µb are their chemical potentials. For dilute solutions, the chemical
potentials of the free ligands and receptors is equal to the reference chemical potential plus the entropy
of configuration:
µα = µ0α + kB T ln (Nα − Nb )

with α = r, l

(4.8)

In the case of the bound ligand-receptor complexes however, the free energy also includes the elastic
energy that comes from stretching these bonds. Considering the bonds as linear elastic ”springs” of
stiffness Kbond and natural length l0 , the bonds mechano-chemical potential µb is written:
1
µb = µ0b + Kbond (d − l0 )2 + kB T ln (Nb )
2

(4.9)

where d denotes the distance between the membrane and the particle. The term Γ(d) in (4.7) was
introduced to take into account the Van der Waals repulsive force between the membrane and particle
at small distances. This energy depends on a characteristic decay length τ , and on a strength parameter
γ as:


γ
d
Γ(d) = exp −
d
τ

(4.10)

The force produced by the attached complexes must overcome this repulsion in order to be able to
uptake the external particle. One can then translate the total free energy (4.7) to a tension t̄ applied
90

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

on the cell membrane by taking its derivative with respect to the separation distance:




γ
−d
∂∆G
(d + τ ) n
= Nb Kbond (d − l0 ) − 2
exp
t̄ =
∂d
d ·τ
τ

(4.11)

where d = dn and n is a unit vector normal to the particle surface. The first term of this equation
represents the force associated to the bond complex deformation while the latter part represents the
repulsion due to the Van der Waals forces. In this chapter and for the sake of simplicity, we consider
both the free ligands and receptors to be abundant enough for their concentration to be considered
constant and their diffusion instantaneous. However, the concentration of bound ligand-receptor
complexes needed to find t̄ in (4.11) varies with time and the separation distance. The following
equation relates the chemical potential of the bound ligand-receptor complexes to their change of
concentration [122, 47]:
∂Nb
= −kr Nb
∂t

1 Kbond (d − l0 )2
1 − KL exp −
2
kB T

!

(Nr − Nb ) (Nl − Nb )
Nb

!
(4.12)

Since the evolution of the membrane is much slower then the ligands/receptors binding rate, we are
only interested in the stationary solution of the above equation, which is given by:

Nb = KL exp

−Kbond (d − l0 )2
2kB T


(Nr − Nb )(Nl − Nb )

(4.13)

Once the number of bound complexes is known, the adhesion force can be calculated for any distance
and time. Figure 4.3b shows the steady state of (4.11) for different distances between the particle and
the membrane. For large distances, the receptors and ligands are not able to attach and there is no

Figure 4.3: Equilibrium force for different fixed distances

interaction between the particle and the membrane. As they come closer together, a few receptors
are able to attach to the particle’s ligands and act as stretched springs exerting an attractive force
between the membrane and the particle. As the process unfolds, the bonds concentration increases
and the membrane wraps around the particle until complete absorption. With the interaction forces
fb and t̄ defined, let us now derive the equations governing the evolution of the MCC.
91

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

4.1.3

Governing equations for the MCC problem

Consider a two-dimensional incompressible viscous flow in the domain Ω delimited by a boundary ∂Ω
in which exists a closed MCC, where the cortex Γc and lipid bilayer Γl that are able to move with the
surrounding fluid. The problem is characterized by the Reynolds number Re = HV ρ/µ where H is
the characteristic length scale, V the characteristic fluid velocity, µ the kinematic viscosity and ρ the
fluid densities in and out of the MCC. We choose here to remain in the Stokes flow assumption with
Re  1, where inertial effect may be neglected. The velocity of a fluid particle is given in terms of
its material time derivative v(x, t) = Dx/Dt, where x is the current position of the fluid particle at
time t. Similarly to the case of a single vesicle in chapter 1, the governing equations and boundary
conditions for the Stokes flow are written:
∇·σ = 0

∀x ∈ Ω/Γ

(4.14)

∇·v = 0

∀x ∈ Ω/Γ

(4.15)

where σ is the Cauchy stress tensor in the fluid and the second equation imposes the condition of
incompressibility. These equations are combined with the governing equations of the lipid bilayer Γl :
[σ · n̄] = f̄l − t̄ − f̄b
µ
(σ · n̄)k± = ± [v]k±
l
drl (ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t)
= v̄(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t)
dt

∀x ∈ Γl
∀x ∈ Γl

(4.16)
(4.17)
(4.18)

and on the cortex Γc :

drc

f̄c + f̄b
1
(ξ , ξ 2 , t)
dt

∀x ∈ Γc

= 0
= v̄(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t)

(4.19)
(4.20)

where the forces fl and fc are the unbalanced forces due to the deformation of the lipid bilayer and the
cortex respectively, and rl , rc denote the position of the lipid bilayer and cortex. Equation (4.17) is
the Navier boundary conditions at the interface, where l± > 0 is known as the slip length, a physical
parameter that depends on the surface roughness. The case l = 0 corresponds to the no slip condition
while l = ∞ is the free sleep condition between the fluid and the lipid bilayer.

4.2
4.2.1

Examples
Cell endocytosis

The cell endocytosis is currently being studied in different areas such as the creation of new drug
delivery tools or the allergies control. Different investigations proved that there is a close dependence
between the size and shape of the nanoparticle and the rate of endocytosis, explaining why different
particles have more or less affinity to be uptaken. In this section, we show that our model is able to
represent the endocytosis of a single nanoparticle, and could be used in the future to investigate the
effect of different factors such as particles shape and elasticity.
92

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

Figure 4.4: The evolution of the cell membrane around a nanoparticle of 45 nm in Radius. Figures A, B
and C represent the pressure and velocity field of the fluid in different moments of the endocytosis. The
last one is the evolution of the wrapped area with the time. The values of the different parameters are
Kbond =2·10−3 N/m, l0 =10nm, Nr = 5·10−3 1/nm2 , Nl =5·10− 31/nm2 , KL =109 nm2 , kB T =4.1e−21J,
τ =5nm and γ= 1 pN
The case of endocytosis being studied here involves the uptake of a single, rigid particle in the
range of tens of nanometers in diameter. At this scale, the cell membrane can be represented as a
flat surface since the cell is orders of magnitude (' 50µm) larger than the particle. As a result, we
impose a constraint on the membrane on the right edge of the (axysimmetric) computational domain
to ensure that the membrane remains flat away from the particle. Moreover, both the membrane
and the cytosol can flow freely in and out of bottom and right edges of the computational domain.
This choice of boundary conditions is motivated by the fact that a nano particle only displaces an
infinitesimal portion of the total cell volume, and that the membrane has enough area reserves to wrap
around the particle without being stretched (the membrane stays in the unfolding regime). In figure
(4.4) shows the evolution of a cell membrane around a particle of 45 nm in radius. The blue line is a
level set function representing the nano-particle, while the red line is a second level set representing
the cell membrane. The adhesion force represented by the black arrows is shown to be much larger in
the leading edge of the membrane as it uptakes the particle.
A critical question in the cell endocytosis problem is to find the minimal particle size for a complete
particle uptake. When a spherical particle is considered, most studies agree that the minimum radius
for complete wrapping lies between 20-25 nm [33],[68],[190],[187],[188]. Figure 4.5 shows how the total
wrapped area in the steady state increases with the size of the particle. This is explained by the
fact that curvature, and therefore the bending energy decrease with the size of the particle, allowing
the adhesion force to push the membrane higher around the particle, until complete wrapping occurs.
Our simulations predict that this occurs for a particle radius of around 22-23 nm, which is in good
agreement with experiments and other studies such as [45] and [68].

4.2.2

Cell Blebbing

The blebbing of a cell has been shown to be involved in the spreading of cancerous cell as an alternative
mechanism of motility [158, 59, 32]. The typical evolution of a bleb may be describe in the following
93

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

Figure 4.5: Percentage of particle area wrapped by the membrane as a function of the particle size.
manner [31]. First, the cell cortex generates surface tension by contracting itself via the acto-myosin
mechanism that leads to an increase of the internal pressure in the cytosol. This first stage can then
be followed by two possible outcomes : the rupture of the actin cortex, or delamination of the cell
membrane, i.e. the debonding between the lipid bilayer and the cortex. Both of these outcomes
produce a local decrease of pressure at the rim of the cell which drives cytosol into that region and
initiate bleb growth. As bleb grows (the growth time is in order of the minute), the actin cortex starts
reassembling beneath the bleb membrane. The newly formed actin cortex in the bleb region generates
tangential contraction (T0 ) that locally raises the pressure in the bleb, effectively slowing down the
growth and reversing the process. This last stage is known as bleb retraction and ends once the bleb
has disappeared [31].
Numerically, this process can be described by introducing two level-set functions associated with
the debonding lipid bilayer and cortex. The interactions between the two level-set are governed by the
membrane-cortex binding force fb given in equation (4.6). This force is not homogeneous throughout
the cell surface, in fact its heterogeneity is responsible of the bleb initiation: as the cortex increases
the cell’s internal pressure, the debonding between the lipid bilayer and the cortex starts in the cell
region that has the lowest binder concentration.
Figure 4.6a shows the evolution of the blebbing process from the bleb initiation to its retraction,
while figure 4.6b shows the relationship between the cell cortex contractile tension and the resulting
bleb volume. The results compare qualitatively with the experimental data by [158], however the
simulations show bigger volumes of blebs. This could be explained by the fact that the experiments
in [158] uses a pipette to create the bleb, adding friction energy on the pipette’s wall that potentially
reduces the bleb sizes. While the bleb is growing, the cell membrane stretches so that its surface
increases up to 2.6 times its initial surface [30] thanks to the mechanism of undulations unfolding
described in part 2.2 . Here we assume the cell membrane stays in the unfolding regime and therefore
offers very small resistance to stretching. Let us now turn to the retraction phase of the blebbing process. The reconstruction of the bleb cortex is led by the polymerisation of actin monomers (associated
with myosin) into contractile filaments described by the following equation [94, 180, 24]:
Cp (t) = Cm0 (1 − exp(−k1 Cm0 t)
94

(4.21)

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

Figure 4.6: (a) evolution of the blebbing process. The white arrows deonte the adhesion force between
the cortex and the membrane. (b) bleb volume as a function of cortical tension
where Cp is the polymerized actin concentration, Cm0 the initial actin monomer concentration with
Cm0 = 0.6 µ and k1 = 12 µ M −1 s−1 is the polymerization rate [160]. The cortex contraction can
then be found as follows:
γc = γc0

Cp
Cm0

(4.22)

where γc0 = 1000pN/µm is the maximum cortex tension [157]. This equation assumes that the cortex
tension is directly proportional to the actin/myosin concentration. The following figure shows the
surface of the bleb with three different values of polymerisation rates. As expected, we observe that
a higher polymerisation rate results in a smaller bleb and a faster retraction (Fig.4.7). Here we have

Figure 4.7: Bleb evolution for different values of actin polymerization rates.
shown that the proposed formulation is able to capture the basic stages of bleb growth and retraction,
95

CHAPTER 4. APPLICATIONS OF THE IMMERSED MEMBRANE FORMULATION TO THE STUDY
OF THE MEMBRANE-CORTEX COMPLEX

including the large deformations inherent to the cell blebbing problem, based on a simplified model of
retraction. However, better descriptions of actin polymerization can later be incorporated, such as a
thermodynamical model of actin polymerisation that depends on the strains in the bleb [65].

4.3

Conclusion

In this chapter, we presented a full Eulerian formulation for the analysis of the fluid-membrane problem, coupled with X-FEM, a numerical method that allows a natural implementation of velocity and
pressure discontinuities across the membrane, and the grid based particle that tracks the geometry
and large deformations of the MCC. We showed that the formulation is capable of reproducing different equilibrium shapes exhibited by the red blood cell, and can handle the very large deformations
experienced by the membrane in the endocytosis and blebbing problems. This is the first formulation
capable of fully describing the mechanics of the MCC, including the membrane-cortex debonding, and
can be used with more detailed models of actin polymerization or adhesion forces in order to describe
biological problems in a way that is both biologically and mechanically accurate.
One of the advantages of the full Eulerian method presented here is the complete absence of
mesh distortion that is inherent to a Lagrangian description of large deformations. Furthermore, the
coupling of the formulation with a finite element method that permits discontinous fields in elements
cut by the membrane enables an easy enforcement of a wide variety of boundary conditions on the
membrane. In the present state, the finite element mesh size is limited by the maximum curvature
along the membrane. Using a curvature based refinement algorithm (easy to implement on a fixed
structured mesh, and naturally compatible with the grid based particle method) could greatly improve
the method’s performance by coarsening or refining the mesh in regions of low or high curvature
respectively.

96

Chapter 5

A coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian
extended finite element formulation for
moving interface problems in
hyperelastic media
Many important and challenging problems in the areas of geophysics (e.g. ice sheet flow, mantle
dynamics), soft materials (e.g. deformation of hydrogels and biological cells) and material science
(e.g. metal forming) involve large deformations or flow of solid material. In these conditions, it
can be convenient to work with a fully Eulerian description of solid deformation, especially when the
boundaries of the solid domain are not moving [46, 55]. For problems where domain boundaries are free
to move, however, a Lagrangian (material) description is required to map solid deformation between
reference and current configurations. Such a moving boundary problem also needs the introduction of
specialized numerical methods that can track an interface without remediating to expensive remeshing
techniques. In this context, we propose to address the challenges with describing the evolution of free
boundaries through the introduction of a coupled Eulerian–Lagrangian formulation, based on the
combination of the extended finite element method (XFEM) and the grid based particle method
(GPM) [100].
Traditionally, a purely Lagrangian finite element formulation is used for solid mechanics because
it is simple to implement, computationally less expensive and does not need any interface-tracking
techniques; however, in the case of severe material distortion, it may suffer from numerical issues
due to excessive mesh distortion. Many strategies have been elaborated to tackle this issue including
the use of remeshing with interpolation techniques between old and new meshes [40, 97, 36], but the
latter is generally cumbersome and displays a lack of accuracy. Another approach consists in using the
Deforming Spatial Domain or Stabilized Space Time (DSD/DST) formulation [155, 156] which has
been powerful to handle fluid-structure interactions with large deformation of the fluid-solid interface.
A more popular approach is to employ the arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) formulation, wherein,
a deformation step on a distorted Lagrangian mesh is followed with a remap step onto a spatially fixed
Eulerian mesh. Some early work on ALE formulations can be found in [85, 74, 105, 21, 22, 184, 89]
and for a complete literature review of ALE and Space-Time methods for moving boundaries and
97

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

interfaces, the reader is referred to [13]. In both the ALE and DSD/DST formulations, the mesh
moving techniques typically aims at reducing the frequency of remeshing [151].
An alternative approach is to use a purely Eulerian formulation for solid mechanics. Although
not as popular as the ALE formation, a handful of Eulerian formulations have been proposed in the
literature [46, 121, 80, 55, 138]. The two main advantages of the Eulerian approach, as pointed by
Benson [22], are: (1) it can handle arbitrarily large deformations, so it can be suitable for studying
soft matter and viscoelastic fluids, for example and (2) it allows the creation, merging and vanishing
of free surfaces or interfaces in a natural manner, so it can be used for studying growth and phase
transformation processes. Since the material is not fixed to the finite element mesh, but rather
flows through the mesh, an Eulerian formulation does not suffer from mesh distortion issues. The
drawback of Eulerian formulation for solids is its higher computational cost due to the need for
computing velocity and deformation variables separately, as opposed to a Lagrangian formulation,
wherein only the velocity needs to be computed. In three-dimensions, this means in an Eulerian finite
element formulation for a compressible hyperelastic medium, there will be 13 unknown (3 velocity,
9 deformation gradient, 1 Jacobian determinant) nodal degrees of freedom (DOFs), whereas in a
Lagrangian finite element formulation there will be only 3 unknown (3 velocity) nodal DOFs [55].
Moreover, in Eulerian formulations material interfaces and free boundaries need to be tracked using
moving interface methods, which adds to the numerical challenge and computational expense.
A critical issue in the case of Eulerian formulations is the handling of heterogeneous or multi-phase
materials. For two-phase materials that are a bonded well (i.e. no slip conditions at the interface)
mixture theory approaches work well, but for more general applications the discontinuity in material properties across the interface needs to handled carefully. Previously, Vitali and Benson have
employed the extended finite element method (XFEM) to model contact in multi-material arbitrary
Lagrangian–Eulerian (MMALE) formulations [170, 171]. Herein, we develop a multi-material coupled
Eulerian–Lagrangian (CEL) formulation by employing the XFEM [19, 115] and a level set representation of the interface [141]. By enriching the standard finite element shape functions with a Heaviside
step function, a sharp discontinuity in the material properties across the embedded interface can be
incorporated within a finite element. Tracking the deformation-driven motion of the interface can then
be accomplished by for instance, using the GPM [100] or, alternatively, using an interface-capturing
scheme such as the level set method [123, 140]. Among the two options, the GPM is computationally
less expensive, simpler to implement, and can also handle arbitrary topological transitions such as
merging and vanishing of material interfaces. Another issue arising from the existence of a moving
interface is the imposition of interface constraints, however, recent work provides viable weak formulations by employing either the Lagrange multiplier method [15, 92] or a Nitsche’s method [51, 5].
Therefore, the imposition of interface conditions is not currently addressed herein and the reader is
refereed to the above cited work.
In the present work, we develop a coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian formulation with moving interface
associated with the large deformations of soft solids. The momentum equations and the transport
equations for the deformation gradient are solved in a staggered manner in time. The velocity field
is first calculated by solving the momentum equation in a Eulerian framework, and is then used to
update the isochoric and volumetric parts of the deformation gradient, separately, using an updated
Lagrangian description. The position of the material interface is tracked using the GPM [100] and
98

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

the velocity field projected in the direction normal to the interface. We show that the method is
accurate in the regime of finite deformation and viable for investigating soft matter mechanics. The
organization of the chapter is as follows: section 5.1 introduces the kinematics, the governing and
constitutive equations, and the resulting weak form for the mechanical equilibrium of an elastic body.
In section 5.2, we present a numerical strategy to discretize the weak form, the tracking of the interface
and the Lagrangian transport of the deformation gradient tensor components. Finally, the numerical
convergence and accuracy of the method is considered in section 5.3 through the examples of a uniaxial
extension of a rectangular bar, and the simple shear of a rectangular block. The mesh-independent
geometric discretization and the absence of mesh distortion problem is then demonstrated with the
test of a cylinder under compression and the indentation of a rectangular block. The latter results are
validated by comparing them with those from traditional Lagrangian formulation in the commercial
software Abaqus. Some concluding remarks are made in section 5.4.

5.1
5.1.1

Formulation of the governing equations
Kinematics

In this study we consider a domain Ω containing an elastic body in the region Ωs (t). The domain Ω
is delimited by a boundary ∂Ω while the interface describing the current shape of the elastic body is
denoted Γ(t). Thus, Γ splits the domain Ω into the solid domain Ωs (t) and its complement denoted
by Ω \ Ωs (t). We employ the Eulerian description of the motion and choose a fixed right-handed
Cartesian system of coordinates {x = xj êj , j = 1, 2, 3}, where êj are the orthonormal basis vectors
[109]. The motion of a physical particle P is expressed by the mapping function x = χ(X, t) between its
reference coordinates {X = Xj êj , j = 1, 2, 3} at an initial time t = t0 and its current coordinates x at a
subsequent time t > t0 (see Fig. 5.1). We assume that the function χ(X, t) is sufficiently differentiable
and single valued with the region Ωs (t). From an Eulerian viewpoint, the spatial velocity field v(x, t)

Figure 5.1: Schematic diagram of the domain and its evolution under an applied traction. The moving
interface Γ(t) at any time t separates the solid domain Ωs (t) from its complement Ω \ Ωs (t).
gives the velocity of the particle located at x at time t and is defined as

v=

∂χ
∂t




=

X

∂x
∂t



99

= g [x(X, t), t] ,
X

(5.1)

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

where g is a sufficiently differentiable function. The deformation of a solid particle is described by the
∂x
tensor given by F =
. The isochoric part of this tensor F̂ is given by:
∂X
F = J −1/3 F̂,

(5.2)

where J = det [F] is the Jacobian determination of the deformation. The rate of change of the
deformation gradient is given by,
dF
d
Ḟ =
=
dt
dt



∂x
∂X




=

∂v
∂x

 

∂x
·
= LF,
∂X

(5.3)

d
∂v
denotes the material time derivative and L =
= (∇v)T is the velocity gradient with
dt
∂x
respect to the current coordinates. We note here that the superscript T is used for the transpose of a

where

tensor. The above equation can be split into its volumetric and isochoric parts as,


dF̂
∂ F̂
1
=
+ v · ∇F̂ = L − (∇ · v)I F̂,
dt
∂t
3

(5.4)

dJ
∂J
=
+ v · ∇J = J ∇ · v,
dt
∂t

(5.5)

∂
êj is the spatial gradient operator, I is the second order identity tensor and · denotes
∂xj
the dot product.

where ∇ =

5.1.2

Strong from

The strong form of the governing equations, which include both mechanical equilibrium and transport
equations, can be written in the elastic body in Ωs (t) as [55]:
∇ · σ + ρf = 0,
dJ
− J∇ · v = 0,
dt


dF̂
1
− ∇v − (∇ · v)I F̂ = 0,
dt
3

(5.6)
(5.7)
(5.8)

where σ is the Cauchy stress tensor and f the body force per unit volume in the current configuration.
The above equations are subjected to the following boundary and initial conditions:
v = v̄ on ΓD
v,

(5.9)

n · σ = t̄ on ΓN
v,

(5.10)

F̂(t = 0) = I in Ωs (0),
s

J(t = 0) = 1 in Ω (0),

(5.11)
(5.12)

N
where ΓD
v and Γv represent the Dirichlet and Neumann parts of Γ for the boundary conditions on

velocity and traction, respectively.
Remark 1 If the transport equations (5.7) and (5.8) are discretized using an Eulerian description,
100

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

one needs to specify boundary conditions on F̂ and J, in addition to initial conditions (5.11) and
(5.12). To simplify our analysis, we propose here to use a Lagrangian (particle) description to update
F̂ and J and does not necessitate the use of above boundary conditions. Ultimately, the formulation
only requires initial conditions on F̂ and J.

5.1.3

Constitutive equations

To model the large deformations of the compressible hyperelastic domain, we consider the isochoricvolmetric decoupling of the strain energy function as,
W = U (J) + Ŵ (b̂),

(5.13)

where b̂ = F̂F̂T = J −2/3 FFT . The specific functional forms of U and Ŵ are to be chosen to satisfy
physical conditions. Herein, we assume the functions proposed by Simo et al. [146, 145] as,

U (J)

κ
[ ln(J) ]2 ,
2
i
µh
tr(b̂) − 3 ,
2

=

Ŵ (b̂) =

(5.14)

where µ and κ represent the shear and bulk modulus of the material, respectively, and ‘tr’ denotes
the trace of the tensor and b̂ = F̂F̂T . The expression for the Cauchy stress is [55],
σ(J, F̂) =

i
1h
κ ln (J)I + µ dev(b̂)
J

(5.15)

1
where dev(b̂) = b̂ − tr(b̂)I is deviatoric part.
3
Remark 2 The above functional form for U (J) is chosen so that it satisfies several requirements [52].
First, in the limit case when Ωs is compressed to a single point or is stretched to be infinitely large the
strain energy always tends to positive infinity, that is,
lim U = +∞ and

J→+0

lim U = +∞.

J→+∞

(5.16)

Second, the volumetric stress tends to negative infinity when Ωs is compressed to a single point and to
positive infinity when stretched to infinitely large, that is,
lim

J→+0

∂U
= −∞ and
∂J

lim

J→+∞

∂U
= +∞.
∂J

(5.17)

Hence U has to be an even power of ln(J) so that U > 0 for all J.
Remark 3 As pointed out in [52] the assumed volumetric part of the strain energy function U does
∂2U
not satisfy the polyconvexity because
< 0 for ln(J) > 1, that is, for all J > e where e is Euler’s
∂J 2
number. However, this inconsistency is not a issue in the current work as all our investigations are
carried out for J < e.
101

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

5.1.4

Weak Form

Introducing the test functions w, integrating by parts and using the divergence theorem, the weak
form of the equilibrium equation in the elastic domain can be written as: find v ∈ V for all w ∈ V 0
such that,
− (∇w, σ)Ωs − (w, t̄)ΓNv + (w, ρf )Ωs

= 0,

(5.18)

where the notation (·, ·)Ωs indicates the L2 inner product with respect to the domain Ωs , and V
and V 0 are spaces of sufficiently smooth functions for the continuous fields and their variations. By
construction, we also require that the test function w vanishes on the Dirichlet boundaries. We do not
write the weak form for the transport equations (related to F̂ and J) because we will use an explicit
scheme to update of the variables for each Lagrangian particle, individually, as described in Section
5.2.5.

5.2

Solution strategy

We now present a novel numerical strategy that couples the Eulerian and updated Lagrangian formulations with the objective of evolving the moving interface on a fixed Eulerian grid. For this the solid
boundary Γ is represented by a evolving level set function across which a discontinuity in velocity
and deformation is described using the extended finite element method. The interface describing the
deformed shape of the elastic body is moved in an incremental manner until equilibrium. For any
increment, the method consists in computing the velocity field v in the current domain Ωs (tn ) by
solving the equilibrium equation (5.18). The field variables F̂ and J are then updated point-wise by
using an explicit updated Lagrangian mapping algorithm between the material configurations at the
current and next increments (denoted by pseudo-time steps tn = t and tn+1 = t + dt, respectively).
Between these increments the interface is moved using the particle-based moving interface method.
In the following sections, a more detailed description of the methodology is presented.

5.2.1

Level-set representation of the solid interface

Mathematically, we here represent the boundary Γ(t) of the solid domain with the level set function
φ defined as,
Γ = {x ∈ Ω | φ(x, t) = 0},

(5.19)

so that φ < 0 inside the solid domain Ωs (t) and φ > 0 outside the solid domain Ω \ Ωs (t). Although
there are several choices for φ, for stability, we choose it to be the signed distance function defined by:
φ(x, t) = ± min
||x − x0 || for all x ∈ Ω.
0
x ∈Γ

(5.20)

Practically, the function φ can be reinitialized at every increment using the locations of the interface
in order to maintain the properties of the signed distance function. When the interface is described
by particles, the reinitialization procedure is discussed in [100]. A more detailed description of the
implementation of the interface evolution algorithm will be given later in this chapter (section 5.2.4).
Remark 4 We note here that the level set method (LSM) [141] may also be used for evolving the
102

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

interface in time. However, the GPM [100] employed here provides an attractive solution to explicitly
track Lagrangian particles on the solid boundary instead of resorting to solving a level set evolution
equation.

5.2.2

The extended finite element approximation

Following an Eulerian approach, a fixed and structured finite element discretization is introduced
for the entire physical domain Ω (including the space that does not belong to the solid body). The
boundary of the body Ωs is then defined with a multi-segment closed surface Γ that cuts through some
of the elements. Since the field variables, namely, v, F̂ and J have non-zero values in Ωs but identically
vanish in Ω \ Ωs (t), field discontinuities naturally occur across Γ. To handle this issue, we employ the
extended finite element method (XFEM), as it is able to capture the presence of discontinuities within
elements and thus render the discretization of the interface Γ easy and computationally efficient. We
adopt a mixed formulation wherein the velocity field v is interpolated with nine-node (biquadratic)
element shape functions and the isochoric part of the deformation gradient F̂ and its Jacobian J are
interpolated with four-node (bilinear) element shape functions (see Figure 5.2). This reads:

vi (x, t) =

9
X

9
X

N I (x)viI (t) +

I=1

F̂ij (x, t) =

4
X

J(x, t) =

(5.21)

I=1

N̂

I

(x)F̂ijI (t)

+

4
X

I
N̂ I (x)S I (x, t)Dij
(t),

(5.22)

I=1

I=1
4
X

N I (x)S I (x, t)aIi (t),

I

I

N̂ (x)J (t) +

I=1

4
X

N̂ I (x)S I (x, t)C I (t),

(5.23)

I=1

where N I and N̂ I denote the 9-node element and the 4-node element Lagrange shape functions,
respectively; the superscript index I is used for node numbering and the subscript indices i, j are used
for numbering the Cartesian components; vI , F̂I , J I denote the standard degrees of freedom (DOFs)
and aI , DI C I denote the corresponding enriched DOFs at node I, respectively; the step enrichment
function S I at enriched node I used to incorporate the jump discontinuity in the fields is defined as,

S I = H (φ(x, t)) − H φ(xI , t)

(5.24)

and the Heaviside function H is defined as,
(
H(φ(x, t)) =

1 φ > 0,
0 φ < 0.

(5.25)

Note that the level set function φ is continuous across the interface and so that it can be interpolated
using the shape functions N I and N̂ I .
Remark 5 Previously, Duddu et al. [55] proposed the above mixed formulation to ensure stability
in the case of nearly incompressible elastic solids (e.g. rubber with Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.48 − 0.5.
However, even for a compressible solid, the mixed formulation results in better accuracy and hence
requires less number of iterations to reach the tolerance limit for the residual.
103

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

Figure 5.2: Illustration of the mixed extended finite element and the location of the degrees of freedom.
Circles (◦) show the location of bilinear element nodes and crosses (×) show the location of biquadratic element
nodes. The interface cutting through the element is represented implicitly using the level set function φ.

In this study, we reduce the dimension of the domain by considering that it is uniform in the x3
direction (plane strain conditions apply). This implies that v3 (x, t) = 0, F33 (x, t) = 1, F13 (x, t) =
F32 (x, t) = 0; this allows us to not consider them as nodal degrees of freedom (DOFs) in our analysis.
Moreover, for clarity, we write the linear system in the following matrix form:



v(x, t) = N̄v (x, t)v̄(t),



(5.26)

F̂(x, t) = N̄F̂ (x, t)F̄(t),



¯
J(x, t) = N̄J (x, t)J(t).

Here, the shape function matrices N̄v , N̄F̂ and N̄J and element vectors v̄, F̄ and J¯ contain both
standard and enriched DOFs and are defined as:



v̄ = [v̄reg ; v̄enr ]36×1 ,









reg = v 1 , v 1 , ... v 9 , v 9 T
enr = a1 , a1 , ... a9 , a9 T

;
v̄
v̄

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

18×1
18×1


 reg enr 



F̄ = F̄ ; F̄
,

32×1



1 , F̂ 1 , F̂ 1 , F̂ 1 , ... F̂ 4 , F̂ 4 , F̂ 4 , F̂ 4 ]T
nodal DOFs
F̄reg = F̂11
22
12
21
11
22
12
21 16×1 ,



 F̄enr = D1 , D1 , D1 , D1 , ... D4 , D4 , D4 , D4 T


11
22
12
21
11
22
12
21 16×1








J¯ = J¯reg ; J¯enr 8×1 ,





T
 ¯reg  1
J = J , ... J 4 ]T4×1 ; J¯enr = C 1 , ... C 4 4×1 ,

(5.27)

h
i

reg
enr

N̄
=
N
,
N
v
v

v

h
i2×36

reg
enr
N̄
=
N , NF
shape functions
F̂

h F
i 4×32


 N̄J = Nreg , Nenr
J
J

(5.28)

1×8

104

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

with
Nreg
v =

h

N1v , ..., N9v

Nreg
F

h

N1F , ..., N4F

=

Nreg
J

=

h

and

NIv

5.2.3

=

NI

0

0

NI

#
,

NIF

i2×18

N̂ 1 , ..., N̂ 4


"

i

N̂ I


 0
=
 0

0

4×16

, Nenr
v =

h

S 1 N1v , ..., S 9 N9v

, Nenr
F

=

h

S 1 N1F , ..., S 4 N4F

, Nenr
J =

h

i
1×4

0

0

N̂ I

0

0

N̂ I

0

0

0

S 1 N̂ 1 , ..., S 4 N̂ 4

i
i2×18
i 4×16
1×4




0 
.
0 

N̂ I

Linearization of the equilibrium equation

The discretized form of the equilibrium equation can be written from the weak form (5.18) by introducing the XFEM approximation. Neglecting body forces, the element residual vector is given
by,
Z
Rv = −
Ωe

BTv σ̃ dΩ −

Z
Γev

N̄Tv t̄ dΓ,

(5.29)

where Ωe is the part of the domain Ωs contained in the finite element e, Γev is the segment of the
T
Neumann boundary ΓN
v intersecting the element e. Furthermore, σ̃ = [σ11 , σ22 , σ21 , σ12 ]4×1 is the

symmetric Cauchy stress matrix, t̃ = [t̄1 , t̄2 ]T2×1 is the surface traction vector and the gradient matrix
of the 9-node element shape functions Bv is given by:

Bv =



B1v ,

...,

B9v ,

S

1

B1v ,

..., S

9

B9v 4×36


with

BIv



=



∂N I
x1

0
∂N I
x2

0

0



∂N I
x2







0
∂N I
x1

(5.30)

4×2

Although, due symmetry it is sufficient to represent the stress tensor σ̃ as a 3 × 1 array in Voight
notation, for the purpose of matrix operations related to the divergence of stress in the above residual
we prefer to use 4 × 1 array. Using a Taylor’s expansion, we linearize equation (5.29) at time tn+1 as
[46] and obtain:


∂Rv
0 = Rv (tn+1 ) = Rv (tn ) +
∂t


∆t,

(5.31)

which yields:



∂Rv
1
Rv (tn ) ,
=−
∂t
∆t

(5.32)

Using the transport equations (5.7) and (5.8) together with the constitutive relation (5.15), the above
equation can be written in the form of a linear system as [55]:
Kv (tn )v̄(tn+1 ) = −
105

1
Rv (tn ),
∆t

(5.33)

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

where Kv is the consistent tangent stiffness matrix. The discretization of the domain integrals using
the extended finite element approximation for obtaining the tangent matrix Kv is described in 5.4.

5.2.4

The grid based particle method

To track the deformation of the interface Γ, we propose to use a grid based particle method similar
to what was introduced in [100]. This method indeed possesses the double advantage of tracking the
interface explicitly with particles while using the underlying fixed finite element mesh; this ensures a
fairly uniform repartition of the particles throughout the interface. Herein, we review the basic idea
behind the particle based moving interface method and discuss the procedure to update of the interface
position and deformations measures within the current numerical scheme. The interface particles on

Figure 5.3: Grid particle scheme . Figure (a) shows the one to one correspondence between the particles
and the nodes inside the computational tube, while (b) shows the local basis, centred on the particle y0
closest to the node considered p.
Γ, whose position is denoted by the vector y, are chosen as the normal projection of the underlying
mesh nodes with position vector p. Since the interface is initially described implicitly as the zero
level set of a signed distance function φ(p, 0) at initial time t = t0 , its value gives the perpendicular
distance between mesh point and interface point. Considering that the gradient of level set function
gives the local interface normal, the initial coordinates of particles y are given by [100]:
y = p − φ(p, 0)n = p − φ(p, 0)∇φ(p, 0)

(5.34)

Note that the above expression is only valid when k∇φk = 1, that is, when φ is a signed distance
function. To limit the number of particles, we define a so-called computational tube such that only
nodes p, whose distance to Γ is smaller than a cut-off value λtube , are taken into account (see Fig.
5.3(a)).
Remark 6 It is important to note here that there is a one to one correspondence between each particle
y and node p, thus, providing each interface particle an Eulerian reference mesh point. This ensures a
quasi-uniform repartition of particles along the interface throughout its evolution and avoids the need
106

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

for node point redistribution schemes, unlike the standard marker particle methods [70]

Between two subsequent time steps tn = t and tn+1 = t + dt, the particles are moved with the normal
interface velocity v⊥ = (v · n)n using a second order Runge-Kutta time integration procedure as
follows:
yt+dt/2 = yt + v⊥ (yt , t)

dt
dt2
+ Ω · v⊥ (yt ), t
2
4

yt+dt = yt + v⊥ (yt+dt/2 , t)dt + Ω · v⊥ (yt+dt/2 , t)

(5.35)
dt2
,
2

(5.36)

where Ω is the matrix of the angular velocity of the interface normal. Introducing the local coordinates
ξ1 and ξ2 that respectively run in the directions tangent and normal to the interface at point yt , the
angular velocity can be written as,


ω = − v⊥ · n

,ξ 1

z and Ωik = ijk ωj

(5.37)

1
(i − j)(j − k)(k − i), indices i, j, k = {1,2.3} and the normal
2
vector out of plane z = [0 0 1]T . The term (v⊥ · n),ξ1 indicates the derivative of the magnitude of

with the permutation tensor ijk =

the normal velocity with respect to the coordinate ξ 1 . The relationship between the local and global
coordinates ξ 1 and y is given bellow.
After the position of the interface has been updated, the particle distribution on Γ may become
uneven, and this can affect the geometrical resolution of the interface. To overcome this issue, the
interface is ressampled after motion by recomputing the particles as the closest points on Γ to the
nodes p inside the updated computational tube (which has moved with the interface). This is done
by first approximating the interface with polynomials locally around each particle. The procedure,
explained here in the two dimensional case, is as follows: for each node p inside the computational
t are collected at time t, carrying with them the tangent st ...st and
tube, the closest m particles y0t ...ym
m
0

normal n̄t0 ...n̄tm to the interface before motion. Denoting y0t as the particle closest to p, a polynomial
t in the local coordinate system {st ; n̄t } centered on
of degree n < m is fitted to the particles y0t ...ym
0
0

y0t . The location ỹit of particle i in this local coordinate system is given by:
(
ỹi =

ξi1
ξi2

)

"
= Rt · (yit − y0t ) with Rt =

(st0 )T
(n̄t0 )T

#
.

(5.38)

Taking the example of a quadratic polynomial (n = 2), the interface around particle y0 is represented
in the local referential as the graph function ξ 2 (ξ 1 ) = c0 + c1 ξ 1 + c2 (ξ 1 )2 , where the coefficients c0 , c1
and c2 are found by minimizing the L2 difference between the ξ 2 (ξi1 ) and the ξi2 . The coordinates
 1 2 1 	
ξ , ξ (ξ ) defines a local parameterization rl (ξ 1 ) of Γ in the neighbourhood of y0t (Fig. 5.3(b)):
(
l

1

r (ξ ) =

ξ1
ξ 2 (ξ 1 )

107

)
.

(5.39)

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

The relationship between the local parameterization rl (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) and the global parameterization of the
interface r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) is then found via rotation and translation operations in the form:
r(ξ 1 , ξ 2 , t + dt) = (Rt )−1 rl (ξ 1 , ξ 2 ) + y0t
with Rt = [st0 n̄t0 ]T ,

(5.40)
(5.41)

where Rt is the rotation matrix from the local basis {st0 ; n̄t0 } to the global basis {e1 ; ē2 }. The parameterization r(ξ 1 , t + dt) can now be used to ressample the interface, i.e. recalculate the closest point
on the interface to the nodes p. This is done by minimizing the distance function d(r(ξ 1 , t + dt); p) =


1/2 r(ξ 1 , t + dt) − p with respect to ξ 1 . In two dimensions, the solution can be found explicitly by
solving a cubic equation. Other geometrical quantities can also be found using the parameterization

	
r(ξ 1 , t + dt), such as the updated basis st+dt , n̄t+dt :
st+dt = r(ξ 1 , t + dt),1 = Rt

∂rl (ξ 1 , t + dt)
∂ξ 1

n̄t+dt = st+dt × z/|st+dt × z|.

(5.42)
(5.43)

Finally, a new level-set function φ(p, t + dt) can be calculated as the signed distance function to Γ at
nodes p as follows [100]:

φ(p, t + dt) = −sgn


yt+dt − p
t
· n̄ |yt+dt − p|,
|yt+dt − p| 0

(5.44)

where yt+dt is the particle associated with p at time t+dt and the “sgn” is the sign or signum function.
The reconstruction of the level set function using the local polynomial approximation of the interface
is computationally inexpensive, and is used in the XFEM part of the algorithm. Let us summarize
the GPM scheme in a pseudo algorithm as follows:
1. Given the initial level set function φ, find the coordinates of the particles that corresponds to
the nodes inside the computational tube (initialization step).
2. Given the velocity field vt , update the position of the particle yt to its current position yt+dt .
3. For each particle y0 , find the neighbouring particles to construct a local polynomial interpolation
r(ξ 1 , t + dt) of the surface Γ around y0 .
4. Given r(ξ 1 , t + dt), find the new particles by projecting the nodes inside the computational tube
on the surface Γ.
5. Compute the new geometrical quantities such as the normal n̄t+dt and the level set function
φt+dt

5.2.5

Lagrangian transport of F̂ and J

As the elastic body deforms, the material flows through the mesh, allowing finite element nodes to
come in and out of the domain Ωs . Because the interface Γ(t) describing the solid domain is moving,
the transport of F̂ and J cannot be described with a simple convection term, unlike when the domain
108

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

boundaries are fixed [55]. To overcome this issue, herein we propose to transport deformation quantities
by employing an updated Lagrangian description. It this scheme, first, the regular degrees of freedom
J¯reg and F̄reg are updated as follows:

1. Given the velocity field vt computed with (5.33) and using the PMIM, the domain Ωs (t) and
the interface Γ(t) are updated to their new position Ωs (t + dt) and Γ(t + dt).

2. For each node i inside Ωs (t + dt), material particle at its spatial location xt+dt
is backtracked to
i
its position xti at time t in accordance with the velocity field vt .

3. The fields Jit and F̂ti known at time t are interpolated at point xti in Ωs (t) using the extended
finite element approximation.

4. Using the transport equations (5.7) and (5.8), Jit+dt and F̂t+dt
at point xt+dt
are computed as:
i
i
Jit+dt = Jit (1 + ∇ · vt (xti )dt),
1
F̂it+dt = F̂ti (I + ∇vt (xti )dt − ∇ · vt (xti )Idt),
3

(5.45)
(5.46)

t+dt
and assigned to the new regular degrees of freedom J¯ireg = Jit+dt and F̄reg
.
i = F̂i

At the end of step 4, the regular degrees of freedom J¯reg and F̄reg have been updated at each node
inside the new domain Ωs (t + dt). However, since the interface has moved, the intersection between Γ
and the underlying mesh has changed and the enriched degrees of freedom J¯enr and F̄enr have to be
updated as well. This is done by solving the following equations in the elements cut by Γ:
J t+dt − J˜ = 0 ∀ x ∈ ΩΓ ,
F̂

t+dt

Γ

− F̃ = 0 ∀ x ∈ Ω ,

(5.47)
(5.48)

where ΩΓ is the ensemble of the elements Ωe that are cut by Γ. The terms J˜ and F̃ are the updated
values of the fields, which can be calculated at any points x inside element cuts by Γ using equations
(5.45) and (5.46). The weak form of the above equations read,



˜
wJ , (J t+dt − J)

wF , (F̂t+dt − F̃)


Γ

Ω

ΩΓ

= 0,

(5.49)

= 0,

(5.50)

and the corresponding discretized forms of are given by,
enr
Kenr
= Renr
J J̄g
J ,

(5.51)

enr
Kenr
F F̄g

(5.52)

=

109

Renr
F ,

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

where J̄enr
and F̄enr
are the unknown global vectors of all enriched degrees of freedom; the global
g
g
tangent matrices are given by,
Kenr
J

XZ

=

T
enr
e
(Nenr
J ) NJ dΩ ,

(5.53)

T
enr
e
(Nenr
F ) NF dΩ ;

(5.54)



reg ¯reg
T
˜
J
dΩe ,
J
−
N
(Nenr
)
J
J

(5.55)



reg reg
T
(Nenr
)
F̃
−
N
F̄
dΩe .
F
F

(5.56)

e

Kenr
F

Ωe

XZ

=

e

Ωe

tand the residuals matrices are given by,
Renr
=
J

XZ

Renr
F

XZ

e

=

e

In the above equations

X

Ωe

Ωe

indicates the matrix assembly of the global system from the element

e

matrices. Thus, the idea here is to simply calculate the enriched DOFs by performing the L2 projections (5.49) and (5.50) [114] such that the deformation field quantities are accurately described in the
elements cut by the interface.

5.2.6

Algorithm

The numerical strategy progressively converges towards equilibrium by solving a series of pseudo
steady states of flow until the velocity vanishes everywhere in the domain. The initially non-linear
problem is decomposed in linear momentum and transport equation that are solved in a staggered
way as follows:
1. At time t = 0, F̂(0) = I and J(0) = 1
2. In the elastic domain Ωs (t), given F̂t and J t , compute vt+dt by solving (5.33).
3. Given vt+dt , update the position of Γ, which yields the new domains Ωst+dt .
4. Given vt+dt and Ωs (t + dt) compute regular and enriched nodal degrees of freedom for F̂t+dt and
J t+dt .
5. if ||F̂t+dt − F̂t || < TolF and ||J t+dt − J t || < TolJ and ||vt+dt || < Tolv , end of computation. Else,
set t = t + dt and go to step 2.

5.3

Numerical Examples

In this section, we present two numerical studies aimed at validating the CEL formulation using 1D
theoretical results for uniaxial tension and simple shear loading. Next, we consider a macroindentation
test typically used to characterize hydrogels and validate our numerical results with those from the
standard Lagrangian formulation in Abaqus. Finally, we study the case of extreme deformations
by simulating the lateral compression of a soft cylinder to demonstrate the capability of the CEL
formulation.
110

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

5.3.1

Uniaxial extension of a rectangular bar

Let us consider a rectangular domain of dimensions 0.2 m (width x1 ) × 0.25 m (depth x2 ) containing
a soft hyperelastic solid that is of dimensions 0.2 m × 0.11 m. We assume that the solid, characterized
by a Young’s modulus EY = 15.0 MPa and Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.25, is fixed at the top end and
subjected to normal traction of t̄ = −2ê2 MPa at the bottom end (see Figure 5.4). The sides of the
solid are constrained in the horizontal direction so that deformation gradient component F11 = 1 at all
times. We discretize the domain using square (9-node and 4-node) finite elements of size h = 0.0125
m. We neglect the effect of gravity and assume zero body forces. The boundary and initial conditions
of this simplified benchmark problem are:

Figure 5.4: Schematic diagram of the uniaxial extension of a soft rectangular bar. A traction of t̄ = −2
MPa is applied to the end of the bar to deform it elastically.



t̄ = 2ê2 on Γ, 



v1 (x1 = −0.1, x2 ) = v1 (x1 = 0.1, x2 ) = 0,

v(x1 , x2 = 0) = 0,




v(x, t = 0) = 0.

(5.57)

As soon as the traction is applied at pseudo-time t = 0, the material in the solid domain moves
downwards with a non-zero velocity v and consequently the solid elongates in the x2 direction. The
vertical component of the velocity field v2 is negative (downward motion) and varies linearly in the
x2 direction as shown in Figure 5.5. With each pseudo-time step (or iteration) the component v2
decreases and eventually the solid reaches its equilibrium state when v2 → 0.
Next, we investigate the performance of the mixed formulation for simulating compressible hyperelastic behavior for ν = 0 and ν = 0.25 using three different finite element (FE) interpolation
strategies:
1. Bilinear: 4-node FE interpolation of v, F̂ & J
2. Biquadratic: 9-node FE interpolation of v, F̂ & J
111

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

Figure 5.5: Numerical results from the CEL formulation for the downward flow of material under
applied uniaxial tension.

3. Mixed: 9-node FE interpolation of v and 4-node FE interpolation of F̂ & J

In the case of uniaxial extension in x2 , we have J = F22 > 1, since F11 = F33 = 1 and all other
components of F vanish. Therefore, it is sufficient to only observe the behavior of F22 from t = 0
until equilibrium. In the following figures, we plot the variation of F22 in the x2 direction at every
50 iterations. Note that the length of the solid increases and the change in F22 decreases with each
iteration as we approach equilibrium. We can see from Figure 5.6 that for ν = 0 the bilinear and
mixed interpolation strategies work equally well, whereas the biquadratic interpolation strategy suffers
from spurious oscillations close to the traction boundary. From Figure 5.6 we can observe that for
ν = 0.25 both the bilinear and biquadratic interpolation strategies suffer from spurious oscillations,
whereas the mixed interpolation strategy is least affected. This study demonstrates that the mixed
interpolation strategy leads to better accuracy and stability compared to the uniform interpolation
strategies.
We next investigate the accuracy of the scheme by comparing the analytical and numerical equilibrium stress versus deformation curves. Using the constitutive law given in equation (5.15), we can
derive the analytical expression for the Cauchy stress component σ22 as,
σ22 =



1
2 −2/3 2
κ log(F22 ) + µF22 (F22 − 1)
F22
3

(5.58)

Now, for different values of applied normal traction t̄ · ê2 = σ22 ∈ [−4 4] MPa we numerically evaluate
the equilibrium value of F22 for three different values of Poisson’s ratio ν = 0, 0.25 and 0.45. These
numerical results are then plotted as a scatter over the analytical solution (solid lines) given in (5.58).
The excellent match of the numerical results with the analytical solution in Figure 5.7(a) illustrates
the accuracy of the method. We also evaluate the variation of the error in the reference (initial) volume
of the solid at each iteration to check for the conservation of mass. The initial volume V (0) = 0.044
112

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

Figure 5.6: Performance of the mixed element formulation for uniaxial tension test. Variation of
F22 along the length of domain is shown for bilinear, biquadratic and mixed formulation for two
compressible materials with Poisson’s ratio ν=0 (left column) and ν=0.25 (right column).

m3 and at each iteration (i) we can calculate the percentage error as,
(i)



V (0) − V (i)
=
× 100, where V (i) =
V (0)

Z
Ωs

1
dV.
J (i)

(5.59)

The variation of (i) with iterations is plotted in Figure 5.7(b). As we can see the error initially
oscillates and after 500 iterations or so it gradually reaches a steady state. However, it is important
to note that percentage error (i) < 0.06 (i.e. error is 0.0006) indicating that the scheme is quite
113

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

accurate in conserving the mass of the elastic solid. Since the volume error is so low at all times, the
convergence criterion is based on the L2 error in velocity or deformation gradient.

Figure 5.7: Validation and error analysis of numerical results from the CEL formulation for uniaxial
tension test

5.3.2

Simple shear of a rectangular block

Let us now study the shear flow of a solid under applied shear traction. Once again, we consider
a rectangular domain of dimensions 0.2 m × 0.25 m and solid domain of dimensions 0.2 m × 0.11
m. The domain is discretized with an element size h = 0.0125 m. We assume the Young’s modulus
EY = 15.0 MPa and Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.25. The solid is fixed at the top end and subjected to
shear traction of t̄ = −0.4ê1 MPa at the bottom end. On the left and right boundaries, we impose
zero velocity in the e2 direction to strictly prescribe horizontal shear flow. The boundary and initial
conditions of this simplified benchmark problem are,

t̄ = −0.4ê1 on Γ, 




F̂(x1 = −0.1, x2 ≤ 0.11) = F̂(x1 = 0.1, x2 ) = I,


J(x1 = −0.1, x2 ) = J(x1 = 0.1, x2 ) = 1,

v(x1 , x2 = 0) = 0,
v(x, t = 0) = 0.

(5.60)









We discretize the domain using the mixed interpolation strategy as discussed in the previous section
with an element length of h = 0.0125 m in both x1 and x2 directions. Due to the applied shear, the
material flows from right to left as shown in Figure 5.8a, so the velocity is negative. In the case of
simple shear flow in x1 direction, we have F12 > 0, F22 = F11 = F33 = 1 and all other components of
F are zero. Therefore, it is sufficient to only observe the behavior of F12 from t = 0 until equilibrium.
We next plot the match between the analytical and numerical equilibrium stress versus deformation
curves. From the constitutive relation in equation (5.15), we can write the analytical expression for
the Cauchy stress component σ12 = µF12 . For four different values of applied shear stress, we plot the
numerical results (scatter) against the analytical solution (solid line) in Figure 5.8(b). We observe an
114

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

Figure 5.8: Numerical results from the CEL formulation for the shear flow of material under applied
shear traction. The results are in agreement with theory, thus, validating our scheme.

excellent agreement between theory and simulation with a linear response in the applied stress range.
Since shear flow is isochoric, the error in volumetric deformation identically vanishes.

5.3.3

Indentation of a rounded rectangular solid

Let us consider a rounded rectangular solid made up of the same soft material as in the previous
example (EY = 15.0 MPa and ν = 0.25). The dimensions of the straight portion of the rounded
rectangle is 3.5 cm × 0.92 cm and the rounded edges are semicircles with radius 0.46 cm. The solid
domain and test configuration are chosen to mimic a hydrogel placed onto a relatively rigid substratum,
typically seen in tissue printing. The total computational domain is 5.2 cm × 1.2 cm that is discretized
using an element size h = 0.1 cm. A Gaussian-shaped vertical pressure field with amplitude p (MPa)
is prescribed on the top surface centered at mid-span as follows:
p(x1 ) = p0 exp (−x21 /α2 )

(5.61)

where α = 0.25 cm is the standard deviation and represents the spread of the applied pressure around
the central point. The solid is restrained in the x1 and x2 directions on the bottom surface. It is
important to note that the bottom surface is restrained in the x1 and x2 directions by enforcing these
Dirichlet conditions on the underlying grid nodes that are closest to the interface, and not on the
interface itself. In order to limit the error created in doing so, we position the rounded rectangle
such as its bottom interface remains very close to the nodes of the underlying mesh. Alternatively,
Dirichlet boundary conditions can easily be enforced directly on the interface with the use of Lagrange
multipliers. The geometry and the boundary conditions are illustrated in the Figure 5.9. The initial
undeformed shape and the final or equilibrium deformed shape of the solid under an applied pressure
amplitude of p0 = 6 MPa are shown in Figures 5.10a and 5.10b. The surface plot of the Jacobian
determinant J in Figure 5.10b shows that the material experiences compression at the center (J < 1)
115

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

and some tension as we move towards the ends; however, far away from the center the material is
unstressed J = 1.

Figure 5.9: Schematic diagram of the indentation of soft solid. A Gaussian type pressure load is applied
to simulate the contact between a rigid indenter and the solid. At the bottom the solid is allowed to
slip, however, due to symmetry the center node is pinned.

Figure 5.10: Numerical results showing the Jacobian determinant of the deformation and the shape
evolution of a soft rounded rectangular solid for p0 = 6 MPa during indentation.
To benchmark our simulation, we analyzed the problem with a fully Lagrangian finite element
formulation (using the software Abaqus with the UHYPER subroutine). For p0 = 6 MPa, the deformed
shape of the top surface of the solid and the variation of J obtained from Abaqus and our coupled
Eulerian-Lagrangian (CEL) formulation are plotted against each other in Figure 5.11a and Figure
5.11b, respectively. The maximum error in the displacement of the top surface δ is 1.28 % and the
maximum error in Jacobian J along the free surface is 0.39 %. Next, we check the mass conservation
behavior of the CEL implementation by plotting the error in mass mass with iterations or pseudo-time
steps, as given in Figure 5.11c. The error increases initially, reaches a maximum around 100th iteration
and then decreases to reach a steady state value as the equilibrium is attained. We also find that the
L2 norm of error in Von Mises stress and pressure decreases very rapidly with element size h, as shown
in Figure 5.11d. Next, to demonstrate the robustness and viability of the approach, we apply a larger
116

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

pressure amplitude of p0 = 40 MPa so as to simulate large material distortions. The final equilibrium
shape of the solid is shown in Figure 5.12a where we note that material below the load undergoes
large compressive strains with J = 0.5 ( that is, the material is confined to half it original volume).
The evolution of the solid boundary with pseudo-time is then shown in Figure 5.12b. As we can see
that interface initially moves with a high velocity and eventually reaches its final equilibrium shape
after about 150 iterations. It is to be noted that at even moderate load of p0 = 10 MPa the UHPYER
implementation in Abaqus crashed just after a few iterations due to convergence issues. For higher
loads, ALE algorithms can work; however, CEL formulations have the advantage that it can be used
to simulate extreme deformations without requiring mesh moving or remeshing schemes.

Figure 5.11: Validation of numerical results from the CEL formulation with the standard Lagrangian
formulation in the commercial software Abaqus for the indentation of a rounded rectangular solid. The
L2 error is calculated by taking the Abaqus solution from a very fine mesh as the exact solution.

5.3.4

Lateral compression of a cylinder

In the previous two benchmark examples, the interface remained flat at all times. Herein, we shall
consider an example problem with a curved interface and demonstrate the ability of our formulation
to handle its evolution as the solid undergoes very large deformation. Let us consider an elastic
compressible cylinder of radius R = 0.81 cm, with EY = 15.0 MPa and ν = 0.25, which is compressed
between two planes on the top and bottom. The total computational domain is 3.2 cm × 2.4 cm
is discretized using an element size h = 0.08 cm. Plane strain conditions apply and body forces are
117

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

Figure 5.12: Numerical results showing the Jacobian determinant of the deformation and the shape
evolution of a soft rounded rectangular solid for p0 = 40 MPa during indentation. Abaqus UHYPER
subroutine did not converge for this high load case, which demonstrates the robustness of the current
CEL formulation.

neglected. We set up the problem with four-fold symmetry about the origin. The boundary and initial
conditions for this problem are,

v2 (x1 , x2 = 0) = v1 (x1 = 0, x2 ) = 0, 



v(x, t = 0)
= 0, 
F̂(x, t = 0)
= I, 



J(x, t = 0)
= 0. 

(5.62)

We define a vertical force that is applied on the portion of interface Γ that is within a certain distance
d0 = from either of the planes. This force function is defined as an exponential repulsive force to avoid
penetration between the cylinder and the two compressive planes:
(

t̄(x) = (φ(x) − d0 ) exp((d0 − φ(x))e2 if φ(x) ≤ d0
t̄(x) = 0

if φ(x) > d0

(5.63)

where d0 represent a cut-off distance over which the repulsive force is applied, and is taken here to be
1% of the radius of the cylinder. As the planes move closer, only a portion of solid cylinder is subjected
to compression, which is clear from the contour plot of J in Figure 5.13. For example, in Figure 5.13(b)
we can see that the material in the center is compressed (i.e. J < 1), whereas the material on the
sides is not (i.e. J ≈ 1). As the planes move even closer the solid deforms into a elongated shape as
shown in Figure 5.13(c) and (d), when the material at certain points is compressed to less than half
its initial volume (J ≈ 0.4). Note that the planes are gradually moved to the final position shown
in Figure 5.13(d) until iteration i = 80 and then held in position. At iteration i = 112, the velocity
in the domain vanishes (less than tolerance), so the stress in the solid is at static equilibrium. As
118

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

opposed to the presented method, a Lagrangian finite element formulation would suffer from large
mesh distortion in this deformation regime.

Figure 5.13: Numerical results from the CEL formulation for lateral compression of a circular cylinder.
The cylinder is located between two rigid planes on the top and bottom that moved towards each other
so that four fold symmetry is maintained. The planes are gradually moved to the final position shown
in (d) until iteration i = 80 and then held in position. At iteration i = 112, the velocity in the domain
vanishes (less than tolerance) so that the stress in the solid is at static equilibrium.

To check whether the numerical implementation conserves mass, we consider three mesh sizes as
shown in Table 5.1 and calculate the % error in V0 after each iteration (pseudo-time step). As expected
the coarsest mesh has the highest % error of 1.6 and with the refinement of mesh, the % error reduces
to as low as 0.16.
Element size
0.16
0.08
0.04

Element in X-dir
40
80
160

Element in Y-dir
30
60
120

% Error
1.6
0.28
0.16

Table 5.1: Percentage error in elastic body mass for different finite element mesh sizes for the deforming cylinder under lateral compression at equilibrium.

119

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

5.4

Conclusion

We presented a stable and convergent coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian (CEL) formulation for modeling
the large deformations of soft compressible hyperelastic materials. The equilibrium equations are
solved in an Eulerian framework and the transport equations of deformation gradient and Jacobian
determinant are solved in an updated Lagrangian framework; thus, the strategy is exactly the opposite
of that employed in an arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) formulation. The mixed element formulation, although originally proposed in [55] for handling incompressibility, is observed to improve the
accuracy of the numerical scheme even in the case of compressible media. The numerical results of
uniaxial tension and simple shear studies agree well with theory indicating the accuracy and feasibility
of the approach. The numerical study of indentation of a rounded rectangular block demonstrates
the robustness of the implementation as compared standard Lagrangian finite element implement in
Abaqus. It is clear that the presented formulation is attractive when materials undergo extreme deformation and distortions such as that observed for very soft and visco-elastic media. It can also be
an interesting strategy for modeling fluid-structure interactions using a fully eulerian framework. This
class of problem is often encountered in biology [162, 64, 65, 164] (e.g. in cell mechanics and growth)
or in studying the mechanics of soft-matter [43, 191, 99].

Appendix: Element tangent matrix for the equilibrium equation

In equation (5.33), the tangent matrix corresponding to the linear system obtained by discretizing the
equilibrium equation is given by,
Kv =
+





1˜
˜
˜
−∇F̂N̄v + F̂Bv − F̂B̌v
3
∂ F̂
Ωe



∂σ
BTv
−∇J˜T N̄v + J˜B̌v
dΩ
∂J

Z

BTv

∂σ

In the above equation,
∂σ
∂J
∂σ
∂ F̂

δσijlm

i
1 hκ
{1 0 0 0}T − σ̃
J J
4×1

δσ1111 δσ1122 δσ1112 δσ1121

 δσ2211 δσ2222 δσ2212 δσ2221
= 
 δσ
1211 δσ1222 δσ1212 δσ1221

δσ2111 δσ2122 δσ2112 δσ2121


µ
2
=
δli F̂jm + δlj F̂im − δij F̂lm .
J
3
=

120







4×4

(5.64)

CHAPTER 5. A COUPLED EULERIAN-LAGRANGIAN EXTENDED FINITE ELEMENT
FORMULATION FOR MOVING INTERFACE PROBLEMS IN HYPERELASTIC MEDIA

˜ ˜
˜
˜ indicates that ∇F̂,
The tilde superscript (·)
F̂ and Jˆ are interpolated using the fields from the previous
time step F̂t and J t as follows:


˜
∇F̂ = BF1 F̄(t) BF2 F̄(t) 4×2
¯
∇J˜ = BJ J(t)


˜
F̂ = N̄F1 F̄(t) N̄F2 F̄(t) N̄F3 F̄(t) N̄F4 F̄(t)
¯
J˜ = N̄J J(t)
and the matrices BFk , BJ , NFl and B̌v are written, for k = 1, 2 and l = 1, 2, 3, 4:
 1

BFk , ..., B4Fk , S 1 B1Fk , ..., S 4 B4Fk 4×32


= B1J , ..., B4J , S 1 B1J , ..., S 4 B4J 2×8


= N1Fl , ..., N4Fl , S 1 N1Fk , ..., S 4 N4Fl 4×32


= B̌1v , ..., B̌9v , S 1 B̌1v , ..., S 9 B̌9v 1×36

BFk =
B̂J
NFl
B̌v
with

∂ N̂ I
∂x1


BIF1



= 



0

0

0



0

∂ N̂ I
∂x1

0

0

0

0







0
∂ N̂ I
∂x2


BIF2



= 



∂ N̂ I
∂x1

0

0

0
∂ N̂ I
∂x1

0

0

0

0

∂ N̂ I
∂x2

0

0

0

0







0

∂ N̂ I
∂x2

0

0

0
∂ N̂ I
∂x2

=

∂ N̂ I
∂x1

∂ N̂ I
∂x2

B̌1v

=

h

∂N I
x1

∂N I
x2

N̂ I

0

0

0






 0
NF1 = 
 0

0

0

 0
NF3 = 
 0

0

0

0


0 

0 

0 4×4

0

0 

0 

0 4×4


 0
= 
 0

0

0

 0
= 
 0

0



0 N̂ I
0

0

0 N̂ I
0

0

0

N̂ I

0

0

i2×1
1×2

NF2

NF4

121

4×4

i

h

BIJ

4×4



.

0

0
N̂ I
0
0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0

0

0




0 

0 0 

I
0 N̂
 4×4
0

N̂ I 

0 

N̂ I 4×4
0

Chapter 6

A thermodynamical model for
stress-fiber organization in contractile
cells

Numerous experimental and theoretical efforts have been directed toward explaining the biophysical
mechanisms underlying the structural reorganization of SFs in different mechanical environments
[163]. Techniques such as fluorescent staining of SFs in living cells coupled with high spatial and
temporal resolution microscopy have permitted to measure the volume fraction and orientation of SFs
when subjected to constant or cyclic stretch or to different substrate stiffnesses. Further experiments
on epithelial cells and fibroblasts have demonstrated that contractility and SF density increase with
substrate stiffness while SF alignment is strongly influenced by substrate anisotropy [185, 69]. In
addition, SFs were shown to align in or perpendicular to the direction of maximum stretch respectively
for constant or cyclic stretch [147, 90, 154]. To explain the latter, Wang and co-workers [178] proposed a
physical model in which perturbations in the SFs strain energy are assumed to cause their disassembly,
and were able to accurately predict SFs orientations in the case of uniaxial cyclic stretch. More recently,
Stamenovitch et al [150] used the Maxwell stability criteria on the global mechano-chemical energy
of the SF-FA complex to find SFs orientation in cells subjected to constant uniaxial stretch. While
those models were successful at capturing the alignment of SFs with respect to stretch, the effect of
the substrate stiffness was not considered.
In this chapter we formulate a general thermodynamical model that captures key mechanisms
of SF organization in contractile cells on substrate of variable stiffness and subjected to arbitrary
stretching conditions. The model is based on the experimental observations that SF self-assembly and
disassembly are governed by intracellular stress an strain: contractile stress promotes assembly and
stabilizes existing SFs [37, 175] while the elastic deformation of SFs causes their disassembly [98]. We
show here that by considering these two fundamental mechanisms along with the viscoelasticity of SFs
[95], it is possible to predict the density and principal orientation of SFs in cells that are subjected to
a variety of mechanical environments.
122

CHAPTER 6. A THERMODYNAMICAL MODEL FOR STRESS-FIBER ORGANIZATION IN
CONTRACTILE CELLS

Figure 6.1: Mechano-chemical potential µsf,mech
in direction α as a function of strain for different
α
stretch frequencies (a). SFs assemble in direction α when µsf,mech
decreases, and disassemble when
α
µsf,mech
increases.
Mechanical
equilibrium
at
angle
α(b)
α

6.1

Model formulation

For the purpose of this study, a cell is considered as a solution (the cytosol) in which a population
of soluble contractile units isotropically distributed (made of actin and myosin) coexist with their
polymerized form (SFs), consisting of long filaments of polar volume fraction φsf
α , with α as the
angle that characterizes the direction of SFs. The chemical stability of unassembled and assembled
contractile units, respectively, may be written in terms of their respective chemical potentials µcu and
µsf
α as follows: [125, 143, 49]:
cu
µcu = µcu
0 + kΘ ln φ


µsf
α

(6.1)

sf

= µsf
0 + kΘ ln φα + aµ

φsf
α
φ∗

!5 
4

 + µsf,mech
α

(6.2)

where k is the Boltzmann constant and Θ is the absolute temperature. Note that the subscript α
denotes quantities evaluated in the α-direction. The first term in (6.1) and (6.2) denotes the reference
chemical potential while the second term represents the entropy of configuration. The overlapping
volume fraction φ∗ and the aµ coefficient are correction terms for the mixing entropy of semi-dilute
polymers which have not been determined for actin solutions. They are neglected in the present work
since their role is not expected to impact the general results of this study. To capture the influence
of stress and strain on SF stability, the chemical potential µsf
α possesses a mechanical contribution
µsf,mech
[125] :
α
µsf,mech
α

Vcu
=
T

Z
0

T




1
2
−σ εα + Esf (ω)εα dt
2
∗

(6.3)

where T is a stretch cycle period and Vcu is the volume of a contractile unit. The first term in the
integral corresponds to the lost free energy due to acto-myosin contraction ( σ ∗ ) and captures the
fact that contractility has a stabilizing effect on SFs, as found in experimental studies [37, 175]. In
contrast, the second (positive) term contributes to SFs dissociation due to an increase in their elastic
energy during stretch εα in direction α. Furthermore, a key component of the proposed model is the
dependency of elastic modulus Esf on the stretching frequency ω to capture the viscoelasticity of SFs.
123

CHAPTER 6. A THERMODYNAMICAL MODEL FOR STRESS-FIBER ORGANIZATION IN
CONTRACTILE CELLS

Here, we describe SF stiffening with loading frequency ω with a function Esf (ω) of the form [174]:
Esf (ω) = El + Ev log(1 + 9ω)

(6.4)

where El and Ev characterize the static and dynamic stiffnesses of SFs at frequency ω = 1Hz,
respectively. Without loss of generality, we assume here that cells are subjected to sinusoidal strain
variation εα = ε̄α + ε̃α cos(2πt/T ) which, when substituted in Eq.(6.3) leads to the following mechanochemical potential:
µsf,mech
α

(El + Ev log(1 + 9ω))
=
2



ε̄2α

ε̃2
+ α
2



− σ ∗ ε̄α

(6.5)

The above expression describes how contractile stress as well as static and cyclic stretch influences the
chemical stability of SFs (Fig.6.1.a.). At high frequency (1 Hz cyclic stretch), SFs appear stiffer and
the disassembling elastic energy 1/2ESF (ω)ε2α is predominant over the contractile work. A rise in the
stretch amplitude therefore increases the mechano-chemical potential µsf,mech
and has a disassembling
α
effect on the SFs. Inversely, at a low frequency (ω → 0), softer SFs emphasizes the stabilizing role of
contractile stress σ ? resulting in SF stabilization with increasing stretch. However, as stretch increases
∗
is minimum (εcrit
above a critical value at which µsf,mech
α
α = σ /El ), the stored elastic energy becomes

dominant and SFs fall into a disassembly regime.
To assess the behavior of our thermodynamical model, we consider a system made of a confluent
population of cells adhering to a homogeneously deforming thin substrate (Fig.6.1.b) whose linear
elasticity is governed by its Young’s modulus E and Poisson’s ratio ν. In these conditions, the state
of any material point in the system is given by chemical and mechanical equilibrium as:
cu
(a) µsf
∀α ∈ [0, π] ,
α =µ

(b)

X

σ β = σ̄

(6.6)

β=s,sf

where σ̄ denotes the externally applied stress and the internal stress arises from a combination of
substrate elasticity and SF contractility. Following standard elasticity theory, the components of the
s = E/(1+ν) +Eν/((1+ν)(1−2ν))δ  , where δ is the Kronecker
substrate stress are written as σij
ij
ij kk
ij

delta. In contrast, the directional SF stress is evaluated in specific direction α and is comprised of
both a contractile and a passive elastic components weighted by the polar volume fraction as follows:
?
σαsf = φsf
α (σ + Esf (ω)εα ). Using expressions (6.1) and (6.2) in (6.6) and invoking mass conservation

between SF and unassembled contractile units allows us to solve for the volume fraction of SF and
soluble contractile units as follows:
φsf
α
φcu

sf,mech
cu
µsf
(εα )
cu
0 − µ0 + µα
= φ exp −
kΘ
Z
1 π sf
= φ−
φ dα
π 0 α

!
(6.7)
(6.8)

where φ is the total volume fraction of contractile units (assembled and unassembled) in the cell
(taken to be 5% in this chapter). These nonlinear equations can be solved numerically to determine
the direction and density of SF in cell’s subjected to various mechanical environments. In our computations, a set of commonly accepted material parameters was chosen: the temperature is 310K, the SF
stiffnesses El and Ev are 100kP a [91] and the isometric contractile stress generated by a SF through
124

CHAPTER 6. A THERMODYNAMICAL MODEL FOR STRESS-FIBER ORGANIZATION IN
CONTRACTILE CELLS

acto-myosin interaction σ ? is estimated to be 10kP a (obtained with a tensile force of 300pN and a
cross sectional area of 0.03 µm2 ). Furthermore, SF contractile units are of the same length of a SF
cu
sarcomere (1µm), and of diameter 10nm. The difference in the reference chemical potential µsf
0 − µ0

is set to −4kΘ such that the average force on micropillars generated by the isotropic contractile stress
of the cell σ c = φsf σ ∗ on a very stiff substrate matches the one from [69], i.e ' 10 − 11nN :

Figure 6.2: Effect of an isotropic substrate stiffness increase on cell contractility as predicted by (a)
the model and (b) experimental methods [69]. (c) schematic representation of experimental set up in
[69], with Np ' 100.

6.2
6.2.1

Model prediction of SF distribution
Effect of substrate stiffness

We now propose to use the model to investigate the influence of substrate stiffness on cell contraction;
which was shown to be significant in contracting fibroblasts for instance [185, 69]. Considering a
free-standing isotropic substrate (σ̄ = 0) of thickness hs and writing the projection of the mechanical
equilibrium Eq. (6.6b) in the α− direction, the strain εα is found to be:
εα =

?
−φsf
α σ hsf

Ehs / ((1 + ν)(1 − 2ν)) + φsf
α Esf (ω)hsf

(6.9)

where hSF denotes the thickness of SFs. Using Eq.(6.9) in Eq.(6.7) and Eq.(6.8), one can find the densf ?
sity φsf
α and contractile stress φα σ in terms of substrate stiffness E. The model predicts a pronounced
?
nonlinear relation between contractile stress φsf
α σ and substrate stiffness (Fig.6.2a), characterized by

an asymptotic value which corresponds to SF volume fraction of 4% for very large substrate stiffness.
This behavior is explained by the fact that contractile strain −εα decreases with substrate stiffness,
which induces SF stabilization at high stiffness (see Fig.6.1.a.). The predicted isotropic SF volume
fraction and stiffness-contraction relation qualitatively matches with experimental trends [69] as shown
in Fig.6.2b. Note that the discrepancy between the initial slopes of the curves likely arises from phenomena that are not accounted for in the present model, including bio-chemical signals and the strain
dependency of sarcomere contraction.
125

CHAPTER 6. A THERMODYNAMICAL MODEL FOR STRESS-FIBER ORGANIZATION IN
CONTRACTILE CELLS

Figure 6.3: The effect of constant stretch on the volume fraction of SF φsf
0 in direction α = 0 is shown
in figure (a), and (b) shows the orientation and disassembly of myofibrils (when overstretched) [147]
with the arrows representing the direction of stretch. Figure (c) is the angular distribution.

6.2.2

Effect of constant stretch

Let us now turn to the case where cells are subjected to substrate deformation. Experimentally, SFs in
contractile cells such as fibroblasts or myofibrils have been shown to preferably align in the direction of
stretch for constant loading [129, 147] and perpendicular to it for cyclic loading (around a frequency of
1 Hz) [90]. To replicate the constant substrate stretch condition, we impose a state of uniaxial strain ¯11

to the substrate such that the angular stretch in a cell is written εα = ε̄α = ε̄11 (1 + ν) cos2 (α) − ν .
This expression is then substituted in Eq.(6.7) and Eq.(6.8) to derive the angular variation of SF
density φsf
α . As shown in Fig.6.3, the model predicts a strong alignment of SFs in direction of stretch
(Fig.6.3c). However, once the critical strain is reached, SFs lose stability and start disassembling
with stretch. This behavior can be understood by observing the curve corresponding to ω = 0Hz in
Fig.6.1.a. where µsf,mech
successively goes through assembling and disassenbling phases (Fig.6.3a) as
α
strain increases; and has been experimentally observed in myofibrils (Fig.6.3b). [147, 106].

Figure 6.4: Effect of cyclic stretching for ν = 0 (b)(experimental result (a) from [90]) and ν = 0.5 (c)
(experimental result (d) from [154]).

126

CHAPTER 6. A THERMODYNAMICAL MODEL FOR STRESS-FIBER ORGANIZATION IN
CONTRACTILE CELLS

6.2.3

Effect of cyclic stretch

In the case of cyclic stretch, the angular strain in a cell becomes εα = ε̄α + ε̃α cos(2πt/T ) with

ε̃α = ε̃11 (1 + ν) cos2 (α) − ν and ε̃11 the applied cyclic uniaxial strain. Conversely to the case of
constant stretch, experimental observations have shown that SFs align in the direction of minimum
stretch, i.e. perpendicular to the direction of cyclic stretching for a substrate’s Poisson’s ratio ν = 0 (no
transverse compression) [90] or at a 60◦ angle for incompressible substrates (ν = 0.5) [154] (Fig.6.4.).
Indeed, introducing the cyclic stretch term ε̃α and a higher frequency ω in Eq.(6.5) increases the SF’s
viscoelastic stiffness and the contribution of the elastic energy in the SF’s mechano-chemical potential
µsf,mech
; and results in a more convex function µsf,mech
(curve corresponding to ω = 1Hz in Fig.6.1.a.).
α
α
This causes the strain to have a disassenbling effect on SFs and leads to high SF density in directions
of minimum strain, i.e. 90◦ for ν = 0 and 60◦ for ν = 0.5. The predicted SF distributions in the case of
cyclic stretching for Poisson’s ratios of 0 and 0.5, shown in Fig.6.4., are amenable to direct comparison
with the experimental images of [90] and [154]. These results explain how SF visco-elasticity leads to
two completely different SF organizations depending on loading frequency.

6.3

conclusion

To summarize, this chapter presented a thermodynamical model that aims at describing the formation and distribution of SFs when subjected to various mechanical stimuli. Model contributions are
two-folds; first by incorporating a mechanical contribution into the chemical potential of SFs, the
formulation enables a natural coupling between chemical stability and stress/strain states in SFs.
Second, the approach revealed the importance of a viscoelastic description of SFs to accurately describe their rate-dependent behavior under constant or cyclic stretching. It also shows that, while
choosing physiological parameters consistent with experimental data, the hypotheses by which SFs
are stabilized by contractile stress and disassembled by their elastic energy give results that concur
with experimental observations in all the cases tested.

127

Chapter 7

Summary and future work
In this thesis, we developed the theoretical and numerical tools to describe the complex mechanics
of biological cells. We presented an Eulerian formulation for immersed membrane and have applied
it to model problems of biological interest in which the cell membrane plays a key role, such as the
equilibrium shape of the red blood cell, the endocytosis of nanoparticles by the cell membrane, and
cell blebbing. Then turning to the mechanics that take place inside contractile cells, we developed a
simple thermodynamical formulation that accounts for the formation and orientation of stress fibers.
Finally, the last chapter presented an Eulerian formulation for the mechanics of embedded soft mater.
These Eulerian formulation and numerical methods allowed us to completely remove issues associated
with classical Lagrangian models when modelling large deformations, such as mesh distortion.
Our future work (and present work) will first consist in incorporating a fluid in the soft mater problem, as the present numerical implementation only accounts for the deformation of an elastic body. We
will then use the thermodynamical model of SF in parallel with the soft mater formulation to describe
the formation and orientation of SF in more complex geometries and loading configurations (such as
a cell resting on micro-pillars) and directly compare our results with experimental studies. The goal
here will be to understand the dynamics of SF formation as they play a key role in numerous biological
cell functions. As the numerical implementation of the immersed membrane and soft mater problem
bear many similarities, our next step will therefore be to integrate them into one single formulation to
study the filtration of cells and vesicles through an elastic porous membrane. This particular problem
has numerous applications in water filtration systems, cancerous/healthy cell sorting or drug delivery
mechanisms. Our model will be able to bring insights on how elastic deformable bodies or vesicles can
plug or filtrate trough a porous membrane.

128

Bibliography
[1] N. Alleborn, K. Nandakumar, H. Raszillier, and F. Durst. Further contributions on the twodimensional flow in a sudden expansion. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 330:169–188, 1997.
[2] Theresa M Allen and Pieter R Cullis. Liposomal drug delivery systems: from concept to clinical
applications. Advanced drug delivery reviews, 65(1):36–48, January 2013.
[3] John L. Anderson. Colloid Transport by Interfacial Forces. Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., 21(1):61–99,
1989.
[4] Tuan Anh, Dimitrios V Papavassiliou, Lloyd L Lee, and Alberto Striolo. Liquid water can slip
on a hydrophilic surface. PNAS, 108(39):16170–16175, 2011.
[5] C. Annavarapu, M. Hautefeuille, and J.E. Dolbow. A robust Nitsche’s formulation for interface
problems. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 225-228:44 – 54, 2012.
[6] Marino Arroyo and Antonio DeSimone. Relaxation dynamics of fluid membranes. Physical
Review E, 79(3), March 2009.
[7] Frank P T Baaijens. A fictitious domain / mortar element method for fluid structure interaction.
(May 1999):743–761, 2001.
[8] I. Babuška and U. Banerjee. Stable Generalized Finite Element Method (SGFEM). Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 201-204:91–111, January 2012.
[9] RW Baker. Membrane technology and applications. 2nd edition, 2004.
[10] Ruth E. Baltus, Appala Raju Badireddy, Wendong Xu, and Shankararaman Chellam. Analysis
of Configurational Effects on Hindered Convection of Nonspherical Bacteria and Viruses across
Microfiltration Membranes. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 48(5):2404–2413,
March 2009.
[11] Francine Battaglia, Simon J. Tavener, Anil K. Kulkarni, and Charles L. Merkle. Bifurcation of
low Reynolds number flows in symmetric channels, 1997.
[12] Ivan B. Bazhlekov, Patrick D. Anderson, and Han E. H. Meijer. Nonsingular boundary integral
method for deformable drops in viscous flows. Physics of Fluids, 16(4):1064, 2004.
[13] Y. Bazilevs, K. Takizawa, and T.E. Tezduyar. ALE and Space-Time Methods for Moving Boundaries and Interfaces, pages 83–109. John Wiley and Sons, Ltd, 2013.
129

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[14] E. Béchet, H. Minnebo, N. Moës, and B. Burgardt. Improved implementation and robustness
study of the X-FEM for stress analysis around cracks. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 64(8):1033–1056, October 2005.
[15] E. Béchet, N. Moës, and B. Wohlmuth. A stable Lagrange multiplier space for stiff interface
conditions within the extended finite element method. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 78(8):931–954, 2009.
[16] Rainer Beck, Britta Bruegger, and Felix T Wieland. Membrane deformation and separation.
F1000 biology reports, 2(May):23–25, 2010.
[17] G I Bell.

Models for the specific adhesion of cells to cells.

Science (New York, N.Y.),

200(4342):618–27, May 1978.
[18] G I Bell, M Dembo, and P Bongrand. Cell adhesion. Competition between nonspecific repulsion
and specific bonding. Biophysical journal, 45(6):1051–64, June 1984.
[19] T. Belytschko and T. Black. Elastic crack growth in finite elements with minimal remeshing.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 45:601–620, 1999.
[20] Ted Belytschko, Chandu Parimi, Nicolas Moës, N Sukumar, and Shuji Usui. Structured extended finite element methods for solids defined by implicit surfaces. International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering, 56(4):609–635, 2003.
[21] D.J. Benson. An efficient, accurate, simple ALE method for nonlinear finite element programs.
Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg., 72(3):305 – 350, 1989.
[22] D.J. Benson. Computational methods in Lagrangian and Eulerian hydrocodes. Comput. Methods
Appl. Mech. Engrg., 99(2-3):235 – 394, 1992.
[23] J Block, T E B Stradal, J Hänisch, R Geffers, S A Köstler, E Urban, J V Small, K Rottner, and
J Faix. Filopodia formation induced by active mDia2/Drf3. Journal of Microscopy, 231(3):506–
517, 2008.
[24] S L Brenner and E D Korn. On the mechanism of actin monomer-polymer subunit exchange at
steady state. The Journal of biological chemistry, 258(8):5013–20, April 1983.
[25] Jan Brugués, Benoit Maugis, Jaume Casademunt, Pierre Nassoy, François Amblard, and Pierre
Sens. Dynamical organization of the cytoskeletal cortex probed by micropipette aspiration.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107(35):15415–
20, August 2010.
[26] D.T. Butcher, T. Alliston, and V.M. Weaver. A tense situation: forcing tumour progression.
Nat. Rev. Cancer, 9:108–122, 2009.
[27] Gregor Cevc. Lipid vesicles and other colloids as drug carriers on the skin. Advanced drug
delivery reviews, 56(5):675–711, March 2004.
[28] Elie Chahine, Patrick Laborde, and Yves Renard. Crack tip enrichment in the XFEM method
using a cut-off function. (December):1–15, 2006.
130

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[29] F Chamaraux, O Ali, S Keller, F Bruckert, and B Fourcade. Physical model for membrane
protrusions during spreading. Physical biology, 5(3):036009, January 2008.
[30] G T Charras. A short history of blebbing. Journal of microscopy, 231(3):466–78, September
2008.
[31] Guillaume Charras and Ewa Paluch. Blebs lead the way: how to migrate without lamellipodia.
Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology, 9(9):730–6, September 2008.
[32] Guillaume T Charras, Chi-Kuo Hu, Margaret Coughlin, and Timothy J Mitchison. Reassembly
of contractile actin cortex in cell blebs. The Journal of cell biology, 175(3):477–90, November
2006.
[33] Abhishek Chaudhuri, Giuseppe Battaglia, and Ramin Golestanian. The effect of interactions on
the cellular uptake of nanoparticles. Physical biology, 8(4):046002, August 2011.
[34] Zhangxin Chen, Guanren Huan, and Yuanle Ma. Computational Methods for Multiphase Flows
in Porous Media. SIAM, 2006.
[35] Munir Cheryan. Membrane technology in the vegetable oil industry. Membrane Technology,
2005(2):5–7, 2005.
[36] E.S. Choi, L. Lavier, and M. Gurnis. Thermomechanics of mid-ocean ridge segmentation. Physics
of Earth and Planetary Interiors, 171(1-4):374–386, 2008.
[37] M. Chrzanowska-Wodnicka and K. Burridge. Rho-stimulated contractility drives the formation
of stress fibers and focal adhesions. The Rockefeller University Press, 1996.
[38] Georges-Henri Cottet and Emmanuel Maitre. A level set method for fluid-structure interactions
with immersed surfaces. Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences, 16(03):415,
2006.
[39] Georges-henri Cottet, Emmanuel Maitre, and Thomas Milcent. Eulerian formulation and level
set models for incompressible fluid-structure interaction. ESAIM Mathematical Modelling and
Numerical Analysis, 42(3):471–492, 2008.
[40] P.A. Cundall. Numerical experiments on localization in frictional materials. Ingenieur Archiv.,
59(2):148–159, 1989.
[41] Henry Darcy. Les fontaines publiques de la ville de Dijon. 1856.
[42] P G De Gennes, F Brochard-Wyart, and D Quere.

Capillarity and Wetting Phenomena.

Springer, 2004.
[43] Pierre-Gilles De Gennes, Francoise Brochard-Wyart, and David Quere. Capillarity and Wetting
Phenomena: Drops, Bubbles, Pearls, Waves, volume 57. Springer, 2004.
[44] Panadda Dechadilok and William M. Deen. Hindrance Factors for Diffusion and Convection in
Pores. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 45(21):6953–6959, October 2006.
131

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[45] P Decuzzi and M Ferrari. The role of specific and non-specific interactions in receptor-mediated
endocytosis of nanoparticles. Biomaterials, 28(18):2915–22, June 2007.
[46] D. Demarco and E. N. Dvorkin. An Eulerian finite element formulation for modelling stationary
finite strain elastic deformation processes. Intl. J. Numer. Methods in Engrg., 62(8):1038–1063,
2005.
[47] M. Dembo, D. C. Torney, K. Saxman, and D. Hammer. The Reaction-Limited Kinetics of
Membrane-to-Surface Adhesion and Detachment. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 234(1274):55–83, June 1988.
[48] Tejal A Desai, Derek J Hansford, Amir H Nashat, Guido Rasi, Jay Tu, Yuchun Wang, Miqin
Zhang, and Mauro Ferrari. Nanopore Technology for Biomedical Applications. pages 11–40,
2000.
[49] V. S. Deshpande, M. Mrksich, R. M. McMeeking, and A. G Evans. A bio-mechanical model for
coupling cell contractility with focal adhesion formation. J. of the Mech and Phys of Solids.,
56,4:1484–1510, 2008.
[50] Robert Dillon, Markus Owen, and Kevin Painter. A single-cell-based model of multicellular
growth using the immersed boundary method. Contemporary Mathematics, 466(1):1–15, 2008.
[51] J. Dolbow and I. Harari. An efficient finite element method for embedded interface problems.
Intl. J. Numer. Methods in Engrg., 78(2):229–252, 2009.
[52] S. Doll and K. Schweizerhof. On the development of volumetric strain energy functions. Journal
of Applied Mechanics, 67(1):17–21, 2000.
[53] J L Drury and M Dembo. Hydrodynamics of micropipette aspiration. Biophysical journal, 76(1
Pt 1):110–28, January 1999.
[54] R Duddu, Stephane Pierre Alain Bordas, B Moran, and D Chopp. A combined extended finite
element and level set method for biofilm growth. International Journal for Numerical Methods
in Engineering, 74(October 2007):848–870, 2008.
[55] R. Duddu, L. L. Lavier, T. J. R. Hughes, and V. M. Calo. A finite strain Eulerian formulation for
compressible and nearly incompressible hyper-elasticity using high-order B-spline finite elements.
Intl. J. Numer. Methods in Engrg., 89(6):762–785, 2012.
[56] C D Eggleton and A S Popel. Large deformation of red blood cell ghosts in a simple shear flow.
Physics of Fluids, 10(8):1834, 1998.
[57] Nagi El-Abbasi and Klaus-Jürgen Bathe. Stability and patch test performance of contact discretizations and a new solution algorithm. Computers & Structures, 79(16):1473–1486, June
2001.
[58] Evan Evans, Volkmar Heinrich, Andrew Leung, and Koji Kinoshita. Nano- to microscale dynamics of P-selectin detachment from leukocyte interfaces. I. Membrane separation from the
cytoskeleton. Biophysical journal, 88(3):2288–98, March 2005.
132

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[59] Oliver T Fackler and Robert Grosse. Cell motility through plasma membrane blebbing. The
Journal of cell biology, 181(6):879–84, June 2008.
[60] Rs Faibish, M Elimelech, and Y Cohen. Effect of Interparticle Electrostatic Double Layer Interactions on Permeate Flux Decline in Crossflow Membrane Filtration of Colloidal Suspensions:
An Experimental Investigation. Journal of colloid and interface science, 204(1):77–86, August
1998.
[61] Mehdi Farsad and Franck J Vernerey. An XFEM-based numerical strategy to model mechanical
interactions between biological cells and a deformable substrate. Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng,
2012.
[62] Mehdi Farsad, Franck J Vernerey, and Harold S Park. An extended finite element / level set
method to study surface effects on the mechanical behavior and properties of nanomaterials.
Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng, 2010.
[63] R. M. Fearn, T. Mullin, and K. A. Cliffe. Nonlinear flow phenomena in a symmetric sudden
expansion, 1990.
[64] L. C Foucard and F. J Vernerey. Particle-based Moving Interface Method for the study of
immersed soft vesicles. IJNME (under review), pages 1–31, 2014.
[65] Louis Foucard and Franck J Vernerey. A thermodynamical model for stress-fiber organization
in contractile cells. Applied Physics Letters, 100(1):13702–137024, 2012.
[66] Louis C Foucard and Franck J Vernerey. An X-FEM based numerical-asymptotic expansion for
simulating a Stokes flow near a sharp corner. IJNME (under review), 2014.
[67] Thomas-peter Fries and Ted Belytschko. The extended / generalized finite element method :
An overview of the method and its applications. (April):253–304, 2010.
[68] Huajian Gao, Wendong Shi, and Lambert B Freund. Mechanics of receptor-mediated endocytosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
102(27):9469–74, July 2005.
[69] M. Ghibaudo, A. Saez, L. Trichet, A. Xayaphoummine, J. Browaeys, P. Silberzan, A. Buguin,
and B. Ladoux. Traction forces and rigidity sensing regulate cell functions. Soft Matter, 2008.
[70] J. Glimm, J. W. Grove, X. L. Li, and D. C. Tan. Robust computational algorithms for dynamic
interface tracking in three dimensions. SIAM J. Sci. Comput., 21(6):2240–2256, 1999.
[71] R Glowinski, T Pan, T I Hesla, and D D Joseph. A distributed Lagrange multiplier / ctitious
domain method for particulate ows. 25, 1999.
[72] Roland Glowinski, Tsorng-Whay Pan, and Jacques Periaux. A fictitious domain method for
external incompressible viscous flow modeled by Navier-Stokes equations. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 112(1-4):133–148, February 1994.
[73] G Gregoriadis and AT Florence. Liposomes in drug delivery. Clinical, diagnostic and ophthalmic
potential. Drugs, 45(1):15–28, 1993.
133

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[74] R.B. Haber. A mixed Eulerian-Lagrangian displacement model for large-deformation analysis
in solid mechanics. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg., 43(3):277 – 292, 1984.
[75] A.K. Harris, D. Stopak, and P. Wild. Fibroblast traction as a mechanism for collagen morphogenesis. Nature, 290:249–251, 1980.
[76] G. Hattori, R. Rojas-Dı́az, a. Sáez, N. Sukumar, and F. Garcı́a-Sánchez. New anisotropic cracktip enrichment functions for the extended finite element method. Computational Mechanics,
50(5):591–601, March 2012.
[77] Takumi Hawa and Zvi Rusak. Numerical-Asymptotic Expansion Matching for Computing a
Viscous Flow Around a Sharp Expansion Corner. pages 265–281, 2002.
[78] W Helfrich. Elastic properties of lipid bilayers: theory and possible experiments. Zeitschrift fur
Naturforschung Teil C Biochemie Biophysik Biologie Virologie, 28(11):693–703, 1973.
[79] W Helfrich. Helfrich.pdf, 1973.
[80] D.J. Hill, D. Pullin, M. Ortiz, and D. Meiron. An Eulerian hybrid WENO centered-difference
solver for elastic-plastic solids. J. Comp. Physics, 229(24):9053 – 9072, 2010.
[81] Eric M. V. Hoek, Albert S. Kim, and Menachem Elimelech. Influence of Crossflow Membrane
Filter Geometry and Shear Rate on Colloidal Fouling in Reverse Osmosis and Nanofiltration
Separations. Environmental Engineering Science, 19(6):357–372, November 2002.
[82] Richard Holdich, Serguei Kosvintsev, Iain Cumming, and Sergey Zhdanov. Pore design and engineering for filters and membranes. Philosophical transactions. Series A, Mathematical, physical,
and engineering sciences, 364(1838):161–74, January 2006.
[83] P.A.A. Hoogstraten, P.M.A. Slaats, and F.P.T. Baaijens. A Eulerian approach to the finite
element modelling of neo-Hookean rubber material. Applied Scientific Research, 48(1):193–210,
1991.
[84] L Howarth. On the flow past a quarter infinite plate using Oseen s equations. Fluid Mechanics,
7, 1959.
[85] T.J.R. Hughes, W.K. Liu, and T.K. Zimmermann. Lagrangian-Eulerian finite element formulation for incompressible viscous flows. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg., 29(3):329 – 349,
1981.
[86] Kuo-Jen Hwang, Chien-Yao Liao, and Kuo-Lun Tung. Effect of membrane pore size on the
particle fouling in membrane filtration. Desalination, 234(1-3):16–23, December 2008.
[87] S II, K Sugiyama, S Takeuchi, S Takagi, and Y Matsumoto. An implicit full Eulerian method
for the fluid structure interaction problem. Library, 65(October 2010):150–165, 2011.
[88] Har Jason and Tamma Kumar. Advances in Computational Dynamics of Particles, Materials
and Structures. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2012.
134

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[89] A.A. Johnson and T.E. Tezduyar. Mesh update strategies in parallel finite element computations
of flow problems with moving boundaries and interfaces. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg.,
119(1-2):73 – 94, 1994.
[90] K. Kaunas, P. Nguyen, S. Usami, and S. Chien. Cooperative effects of rho and mechanical
stretch on stress fiber organization. pnas, 2005.
[91] K. Kawabata, Y. Sado, M. Nagayama, T. Nitta, K. Nemoto, Y. Koyama, and H. Haga. Visualization of dynamic organization of cytoskeleton gels in living cells by hybrid-spm. Chinese J. of
Polymer Science, 21,2:169–174, 2003.
[92] T.-Y. Kim, J. Dolbow, and T. Laursen. A mortared finite element method for frictional contact
on arbitrary interfaces. Comput. Mech., 39(3):223–235, 2007.
[93] Bathe KJ. Finite element procedures. Prentice Hall, Englewood Clis, N.J, 1996.
[94] E D Korn. Actin polymerization and its regulation by proteins from nonmuscle cells. Physiological reviews, 62(2):672–737, April 1982.
[95] S. Kumar, I. Z. Maxwell, A. Heisterkamp, T. R. Polte, T. P. Lele, M. Salanga, E. Mazur, and
D. E. Ingber. Viscoelastic retraction of single living stress fibers and its impact on cell shape,
cytoskeletal organization, and extracellular matrix mechanics. 85:3762–3773, 2006.
[96] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz. Fluid Mechanics (2nd Ed). Pergamon Press, 1987.
[97] L.L. Lavier and W.R. Buck. Half graben versus large-offset low-angle normal fault: Importance of keeping cool during normal faulting. Journal of Geophysical Research - Solid Earth,
107(B6):2122, 2002.
[98] C. F. Lee, C. Haase, S. Deguchi, and R. Kaunas. Cyclic stretch-induced stress fiber dynamics - dependence on strain rate, rho-kinase and mlck. Biochemical abd Biophysical Research
Communications, 401(3):344–349, 2010.
[99] F M Leslie. Continuum Mechanics Thermodynamlcs Continuum theory for nematic liquid crystals. Continuum, 4:167–175, 1992.
[100] S. Leung and H. Zhao. A grid based particle method for moving interface problems. J. Comp.
Physics, 228(8):2993 – 3024, 2009.
[101] Shingyu Leung, John Lowengrub, and Hongkai Zhao. A Grid Based Particle Method for Solving Partial Differential Equations on Evolving Surfaces and Modeling High Order Geometrical
Motion. pages 2540–2561, 2011.
[102] Shingyu Leung and Hongkai Zhao. A grid based particle method for moving interface problems.
Journal of Computational Physics, 228(8):2993–3024, May 2009.
[103] Yibao Li, Ana Yun, and Junseok Kim. An immersed boundary method for simulating a single
axisymmetric cell growth and division. Journal of mathematical biology, October 2011.
135

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[104] Chun Liu and Noel J Walkington. An Eulerian Description of Fluids Containing Visco-Elastic
Particles. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 159(3):229–252, 2001.
[105] W.K. Liu, C. Herman, C. Jiun-Shyan, and T. Belytschko. Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian PetrovGalerkin finite elements for nonlinear continua. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg., 68(3):259
– 310, 1988.
[106] L. Lu, Y. Feng, W. J. Hucker, S. Oswald, G. D. Longmore, and F. C-P. Yin. Actin stress fiber
pre-extension in human aortic endothelial cells. Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton, 65:281–294,
2008.
[107] Lin Ma and William S Klug. Viscous regularization and r-adaptive remeshing for finite element
analysis of lipid membrane mechanics. Methods, 227:5816–5835, 2008.
[108] M. Makale. Cellular mechanobiology and cancer metastasis. Birth Defects Research (Part C),
81:329–343, 2007.
[109] L. E. Malvern. Introduction to the Mechanics of a Continuous Medium. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ, USA, 1969.
[110] P. Martin. Wound healing: Aiming for perfect skin regeneration. Science, 276:75–81, 1997.
[111] Miccal T. Matthews and James M. Hill. Micro/nano sliding plate problem with Navier boundary
condition. Zeitschrift für angewandte Mathematik und Physik, 57(5):875–903, June 2006.
[112] Harvey T McMahon and Jennifer L Gallop. Membrane curvature and mechanisms of dynamic
cell membrane remodelling. Nature, 438(7068):590–6, December 2005.
[113] Alexander Menk and Stéphane P A Bordas. A robust preconditioning technique for the extended
finite element method. (October 2010):1609–1632, 2011.
[114] R. Merle and J. Dolbow. Solving thermal and phase change problems with the extended finite
element method. Comp. Mech., 28(5):339–350, 2002.
[115] N. Moës, J. Dolbow, and T. Belytschko. A finite element method for crack growth without
remeshing. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 46(1):131–150, 1999.
[116] Nicolas Moës, Eric Béchet, and Matthieu Tourbier. Imposing Dirichlet boundary conditions in
the extended finite element method. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 67(12):1641–1669, September 2006.
[117] Nicolas Moës, John Dolbow, and Ted Belytschko. A finite element method for crack growth
without remeshing. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 46(1):131–
150, 1999.
[118] H K Moffatt. Viscous and resistive eddies near a sharp corner. 18:1–18, 1963.
[119] T. Mullin, J. R. T. Seddon, M. D. Mantle, and a. J. Sederman. Bifurcation phenomena in the
flow through a sudden expansion in a circular pipe. Physics of Fluids, 21(1):014110, 2009.
136

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[120] S Okazawa, K Kashiyama, and Y Kaneko. Eulerian formulation using stabilized finite element
method for large deformation solid dynamics. Online, 72(May):1544–1559, 2007.
[121] S. Okazawa, K. Kashiyama, and Y. Kaneko. Eulerian formulation using stabilized finite element
method for large deformation solid dynamics. Intl. J. Numer. Methods in Engrg., 72(13):1544–
1559, 2007.
[122] J E Olberding, M D Thouless, E M Arruda, and K Garikipati. IUTAM Symposium on Cellular,
Molecular and Tissue Mechanics. Stress: The International Journal on the Biology of Stress,
16, 2010.
[123] S. Osher and J. A. Sethian. Fronts propagating with curvature-dependent speed: Algorithms
based on Hamilton-Jacobi formulations. J. Comp. Physics, 79(1):12–49, November 1988.
[124] M. Paszek, N. Zahir, K Johnson, J. Lakins, G. Rozenberg, A Gefen, C.A. Reinhart-King, S. Margulies, M. Dembo, D. Boettiger, D.A. Hammer, and V.M. Weaver. Tensional homeostasis and
the malignant phenotype. Cancer Cell, 8:241–254, 2005.
[125] A. Pathak, V. S. Deshpande, R. M. McMeeking, and A. G. Evans. The simulation of stress
fibre and focal adhesion development in cells on patterned substrates. J.The. Roy. Soc. Int..,
5:507–524, 2008.
[126] C Peskin. Flow patterns around heart valves: A numerical method. Journal of Computational
Physics, 10(2):252–271, 1972.
[127] Charles S. Peskin. The immersed boundary method. Acta Numerica, 11(1):1–39, 2002.
[128] C.S. Peskin. Numerical analysis of blood flow in the heart.pdf. Journal of Computational
Physics, 25(1):220–252, 1977.
[129] P. P. Pirentis and K. A. Lazopoulos. On stress bre reorientation under plane substrate stretching.
Arch Appl Mech, 79:263–277, 2009.
[130] Thomas D Pollard and Gary G Borisy. Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of
actin filaments. Cell, 112(4):453–65, February 2003.
[131] A Ponti, M Machacek, S L Gupton, C M Waterman-Storer, and G Danuser. Two distinct actin
networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells. Science, 305(5691):1782–6, 2004.
[132] Julian J Pop. Acceleration Waves in Isotropic Elastic Membranes. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 77(1):47–93, 1981.
[133] C. Pozrikidis. Flow-induced deformation of an elastic membrane adhering to a wall. International
Journal of Solids and Structures, 46(17):3198–3208, August 2009.
[134] C. Pozrikidis. Introduction to Theoretical and Computational Fluid Dynamics. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2011.
[135] T Rabczuk, R Gracie, J Hsong, and T Belytschko. Immersed Particle Method for Fluid-Structure
Interaction. pages 1–6, 2000.
137

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[136] W Rawicz, K C Olbrich, T McIntosh, D Needham, and E Evans. Effect of chain length and
unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers. Biophysical journal, 79(1):328–39, July 2000.
[137] Casey L Richardson, Jan Hegemann, Eftychios Sifakis, Jeffrey Hellrung, and Joseph M Teran.
An XFEM method for modelling geometrically elaborate crack propagation in brittle materials.
pages 1–41, 2009.
[138] T. Richter. A fully Eulerian formulation for fluid-structure-interaction problems. J. Comp.
Physics, 233:227 – 240, 2013.
[139] Henning Sauerland and Thomas-peter Fries. The stable XFEM for two-phase flows.
[140] J. A. Sethian. A marching level set method for monotonically advancing fronts. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 93(4):1591–1595, 1996.
[141] J. A. Sethian. Level Set Methods & Fast Marching Methods: Evolving Interfaces in Computational Geometry, Fluid Mechanics, Computer Vision, and Materials Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1999.
[142] M. Shapira, D. Degani, and D. Weihs. Stability and existence of multiple solutions for viscous
flow in suddenly enlarged channels, 1990.
[143] T. Shemesh, B. Geiger, A. D. Bershadsky, and M. M. Kozlov. Focal adhesions as mechanosensors:
A physical mechanism. pnas, 2005.
[144] S O Sher. A Level Set Formulation of Eulerian Interface Capturing Methods for Incompressible
Fluid Flows. 464(124):449–464, 1996.
[145] J. C. Simo and T. J. R. Hughes. Computational Inelasticity. Springer, Berlin, 1998.
[146] J.C. Simo. A finite strain beam formulation. the three dimensional dynamic problem. part 1.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 49:55–70, 1986.
[147] D.G. Simpson, Majeski, T.K. M. Borg, and L. Terracio. Regulation of cardiac myocyte protein
turnover and myofibrillar structure in vitro by specific directions of stretch. Circulation Research,
1999.
[148] Shri Singh. Liquid Crystals: Fundamentals. 2002.
[149] Lianfa Song. Flux decline in crossflow microfiltration and ultrafiltration: mechanisms and modeling of membrane fouling. Journal of Membrane Science, 139(2):183–200, February 1998.
[150] D. Stamenovic, K. A. Lazopoulos, A. Pirentis, and B. E. Suki. Mechanical stability determines
stress fiber and focal adhesion orientation. Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering, 2009.
[151] K. Stein, T.E. Tezduyar, and R. Benney. Mesh moving techniques for fluid-structure interactions
with large displacements. Journal of Applied Mechanics, 70(1):58–63, 2003.
[152] Y. Sui, Y. Chew, P. Roy, X. Chen, and H. Low. Transient deformation of elastic capsules in
shear flow: Effect of membrane bending stiffness. Physical Review E, 75(6):066301, June 2007.
138

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[153] Mingzhai Sun, Nathan Northup, Francoise Marga, Tamas Huber, Fitzroy J Byfield, Irena Levitan, and Gabor Forgacs. The effect of cellular cholesterol on membrane-cytoskeleton adhesion.
Journal of Cell Science, 120(Pt 13):2223–2231, 2007.
[154] T. Takemasa, K. Sugimoto, and K. Yamashita. Amplitude-dependent stress fiber reorientation
in early response to cyclic strain. Experimental Cell Research, 230(2):407–410, 1997.
[155] T.E. Tezduyar, M. Behr, and J. Liou. A new strategy for finite element computations involving
moving boundaries and interfaces - The deforming-spatial-domain/space-time procedure: I. The
concept and the preliminary numerical tests. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg., 94(3):339
– 351, 1992.
[156] T.E. Tezduyar, M. Behr, S. Mittal, and J. Liou. A new strategy for finite element computations
involving moving boundaries and interfaces - The deforming-spatial-domain/space-time procedure: II. Computation of free-surface flows, two-liquid flows, and flows with drifting cylinders.
Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg., 94(3):353 – 371, 1992.
[157] O Thoumine, O Cardoso, and J J Meister. Changes in the mechanical properties of fibroblasts
during spreading: a micromanipulation study. European biophysics journal EBJ, 28(3):222–34,
1999.
[158] Jean-Yves Tinevez, Ulrike Schulze, Guillaume Salbreux, Julia Roensch, Jean-François Joanny,
and Ewa Paluch. Role of cortical tension in bleb growth. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 106(44):18581–6, November 2009.
[159] H S Udaykumar. An Eulerian method for computation of multimaterial impact with ENO shockcapturing and sharp interfaces, volume 186. 2003.
[160] Jasper van der Gucht and Cécile Sykes. Physical model of cellular symmetry breaking. Cold
Spring Harbor perspectives in biology, 1(1):a001909, July 2009.
[161] Raoul van Loon, Patrick D. Anderson, Frank P.T. Baaijens, and Frans N. van de Vosse. A
three-dimensional fluidstructure interaction method for heart valve modelling. Comptes Rendus
Mécanique, 333(12):856–866, December 2005.
[162] F. J Vernerey and M. Farsad. A constrained mixture approach to mechano-sensing and force generation in contractile cells. Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials, 4(8):1683–
99, November 2011.
[163] F. J. Vernerey and M. Farsad. On stress bre reorientation under plane substrate stretching. A
constrained mixture approach to mechano-sensing and force generation in contractile cells, page
doi:10.1016/j.jmbbm.2011.05.022, 2011.
[164] F. J. Vernerey and M. Farsad. A mathematical model of the coupled mechanisms of cell adhesion,
contraction and spreading. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 68(4):989–1022, 2014.
[165] F. J. Vernerey, C. Greenwald, and S. J. Bryant. Triphasic mixture model of cell-mediated
enzymatic degradation of hydrogels. Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering, pages 1–14, 2011.
139

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[166] Franck Vernerey, Wing Kam Liu, and Brian Moran. Multi-scale micromorphic theory for hierarchical materials. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 55(12):2603–2651, December
2007.
[167] Franck J. Vernerey. A theoretical treatment on the mechanics of interfaces in deformable porous
media. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 48(22-23):3129–3141, November 2011.
[168] Franck J. Vernerey. The Effective Permeability of Cracks and Interfaces in Porous Media.
Transport in Porous Media, 93(3):815–829, March 2012.
[169] Franck J. Vernerey, Louis Foucard, and Mehdi Farsad. Bridging the Scales to Explore Cellular
Adaptation and Remodeling. BioNanoScience, 1(3):110–115, July 2011.
[170] E. Vitali and D.J. Benson. An extended finite element formulation for contact in multi-material
arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian calculations. Intl. J. Numer. Methods in Engrg., 67(10):1420–
1444, 2006.
[171] E. Vitali and D.J. Benson. Contact with friction in multi-material arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian
formulations using X-FEM. Intl. J. Numer. Methods in Engrg., 76(6):893–921, 2008.
[172] G J Wagner, N Moes, W K Liu, and T Belytschko. The extended ÿnite element method for
rigid particles in Stokes ow. (September 2000):293–313, 2001.
[173] Haim Waisman and Ted Belytschko. Parametric enrichment adaptivity by the extended finite
element method. (July 2007):1671–1692, 2008.
[174] T Wakatsuki, M. S. Kolodney, G. I. Zahalak, and E. L. Elson. Cell mechanics studied by a
reconstituted model tissue. Biophysical Journal, 79:2353–2368, 2000.
[175] Sam Walcott and Sean X. Sun. A mechanical model of actin stress fiber formation and substrate
elasticity sensing in adherent cells. pnas, 2010.
[176] W A Wall, A Gerstenberger, and U K. An XFEM Based Fixed-Grid Approach for 3D FluidStructure Interaction. In Hans-Joachim Bungartz, Miriam Mehl, and Michael Schäfer, editors,
Fluid Structure Interaction II, volume 73 of Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering, pages 327–349. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010.
[177] Tobias C Walther, Jason H Brickner, Pablo S Aguilar, Sebastián Bernales, Carlos Pantoja, and
Peter Walter. Eisosomes mark static sites of endocytosis. Nature, 439(7079):998–1003, February
2006.
[178] J.H. Wang. Substrate deformation determines actin cytoskeleton reorganization: a mathematical
modeling and experimental study. J. Theor. Biol., 2007.
[179] Xiaodong Wang and Wing Kam Liu. Extended immersed boundary method using FEM and
RKPM.

Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 193(12-14):1305–1321,

March 2004.
[180] a Wegner. Head to tail polymerization of actin. Journal of molecular biology, 108(1):139–50,
November 1976.
140

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[181] Huibin Wei, Bor-han Chueh, Huiling Wu, Eric W Hall, Cheuk-wing Li, Romana Schirhagl, JinMing Lin, and Richard N Zare. Particle sorting using a porous membrane in a microfluidic
device. Lab on a chip, 11(2):238–45, January 2011.
[182] Waloddi Weibull. A statistical distribution of wide applicability, 1951.
[183] J.-Z. Wu, Y.-T. Yang, Y.-B. Luo, and C. Pozrikidis. Fluid kinematics on a deformable surface.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 541(-1):371, October 2005.
[184] T. Yamada and F. Kikuchi. An arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian finite element method for incompressible hyperelasticity. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg., 102(2):149 – 177, 1993.
[185] T. Yeung, P. C. George, L. A. Flanagan, B. Marg, M. Ortiz, M. Funaki, N. Zahir, W. Ming,
V. Weaver, and P. A. Janmey. Effects of substrate stiffness on cell morphology, cytoskeletal
structure, and adhesion. Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton, 60:24–34, 2005.
[186] Jennifer Young and Sorin Mitran. A numerical model of cellular blebbing: a volume-conserving,
fluid-structure interaction model of the entire cell. Journal of biomechanics, 43(2):210–20, January 2010.
[187] Hongyan Yuan, Changjin Huang, and Sulin Zhang.

Virus-inspired design principles of

nanoparticle-based bioagents. PloS one, 5(10):e13495, January 2010.
[188] Hongyan Yuan and Sulin Zhang. Effects of particle size and ligand density on the kinetics of
receptor-mediated endocytosis of nanoparticles. Applied Physics Letters, 96(3):033704, 2010.
[189] Lucy Zhang, Axel Gerstenberger, and Xiaodong Wang. Immersed Finite Element Method.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, (September 2003):1–25, 2002.
[190] Sulin Zhang, Ju Li, George Lykotrafitis, Gang Bao, and Subra Suresh. Size-Dependent Endocytosis of Nanoparticles. Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.), 21:419–424, January
2009.
[191] Wei Zhu, Michael Shelley, and Peter Palffy-Muhoray. Modeling and simulation of liquid-crystal
elastomers. Physical Review E, 83(5):1–11, May 2011.
[192] Alexander Z. Zinchenko, Michael a. Rother, and Robert H. Davis. A novel boundary-integral
algorithm for viscous interaction of deformable drops. Physics of Fluids, 9(6):1493, 1997.

141

